Moving to prevent insurers from dominating their government regulator , a state senator introduced legislation Thursday that would prohibit the industry from contributing campaign funds to candidates for the new elective office of insurance commissioner . Sen. Gary K. Hart ( D-Santa Barbara ) told a press conference he feared that , without the ban , insurance companies would use campaign contributions to control an office that had been created by Proposition 103 to protect consumers . `` Unless we have , I think , some very strict rules and regulations as it applies to contributions to this particular office , we run the risk that it . . . could in fact become basically an agent of the very industry it was established to regulate , '' Hart said . Among other things , including a 20 % premium rate rollback , Proposition 103 calls for the election of a state insurance commissioner beginning in 1990 . Currently , the insurance commissioner is appointed by the governor . However , the provisions of Proposition 103 are on hold , awaiting a review of its constitutionality by the state Supreme Court . Steve Barrow of California Common Cause , a nonprofit group supporting campaign financing reform , said the insurance industry already has demonstrated its ability to invest huge sums in political issues and races by pouring at least $ 65 million into last fall 's insurance initiative campaigns . Restrictions Unfair However , David Fountain , public information director for the Assn . of California Insurance Cos. , insisted the industry has not abused its right to make campaign donations and that it would be unfair to force restrictions on the industry . Why not take similar action , he asked , against lawyers who contribute to judicial races or bankers and bond houses that pour campaign money into races for state treasurer and controller ? `` Right now it 's popular to jump on the bandwagon of whipping the insurance industry , '' he said . Fountain questioned the constitutionality of Hart 's bill because its prohibitions would apply to contributions from insurance agents and brokers as well as insurance companies and political action committees . `` I do n't think you can stop individuals from participating in the election process , '' he said . But Barrow said similar bans had been successfully enacted in North Carolina , Delaware and Washington . In all , 11 states have elected insurance commissioners . In states without contribution restrictions , he said , industry donations tend to `` overwhelm '' the election process . Both Hart and Fountain predicted the bill had a `` good chance '' of passing , particularly in the political climate created by the defeat of insurance industry-backed initiatives in November . Besides the ban on contributions , Hart 's bill would prohibit the elected commissioner from accepting speaking fees and from taking a job in the insurance industry for two years after leaving office . The bill also would require candidates for insurance commissioner to disclose all income sources for the two years before filing for office .