Pacific Ranch Markets has signed an agreement to take over the Irvine Ranch Farmers Market in Orange -- leaving only one grocery store in the county still operating under the Irvine Ranch name . Effective March 13 , Santa Ana-based Pacific Ranch Markets will begin operating the 21,000-square-foot store at Newport and Chapman avenues , said Dan Parker , president of Tri Pacific Commercial Brokerage Inc. , which represents Pacific Ranch . The Orange store will be Pacific Ranch Markets ' third grocery store in Orange County . There is a second Pacific Ranch store in Laguna Niguel . The chain also operates the former Irvine Ranch Farmers Market in Newport Beach under the name Farmers Market at Atrium Court . Another Pacific Ranch Market operates in Corona del Mar , but it is under different , independent ownership . The Irvine Ranch chain -- which once operated 12 stores , seven of them in Orange County -- filed for bankruptcy protection in 1988 . Late last year , Tribu Inc. , the parent of Chalet Gourmet in Los Angeles , bought Irvine Ranch 's stock and took control of the ailing chain . It now appears that the Tribu and Chalet Gourmet investor group will soon be operating only two of the original Irvine Ranch markets . Three of the original Irvine Ranch stores -- in Mission Viejo , Yorba Linda and Northridge -- have closed their doors since the bankruptcy filing . The owners of Chalet Gourmet have sold the Costa Mesa and Tustin stores , which are now operating under other names . A store in Texas has closed and another in San Diego is now being operated under a different name by the Hahn Co . In Orange County , that leaves the Irvine Ranch store in Irvine , which is still operating , and a store in Brea that never opened . Parker of Tri Pacific said Monday that his firm has submitted offers to lease the Irvine and Brea sites . The offers were by two different operators , neither of them Pacific Ranch Markets , Parker said . Chalet Gourmet and its affiliates , meanwhile , are still operating the Irvine Ranch stores at the Beverly Center and in Woodland Hills . A spokesman for Chalet Gourmet , Irwin N. Gold , said Monday that the investor group `` definitely will keep '' those two stores . Meanwhile , Jon Hubbard , founder of the Irvine Ranch chain , last month filed for personal bankruptcy and has become the manager of the Costa Mesa store , now called the Original Irvine Ranch Market .