Ever since the Big A was moved out by the 57 Freeway , the darn thing just has n't worked right . Neither have the Angels -- but one has to suppose that is part of their charm . The club played its first season in the enclosed Anaheim Stadium in 1980 after the Big A scoreboard had spent nearly 15 seasons behind the left-center field fence . The stadium was enclosed to accommodate the Los Angeles Rams , who moved to Anaheim in 1980 . The 70-foot wide halo on the Big A used to light up for home runs and would shine after Angel victories ( though in those days , there was not much chance of blowing a fuse ) . Many were upset when plans were announced to enclose the stadium for the 1980 season and move the Big A . But it now may be more popular than ever . Today , fans like the Big A just where it is . Though many still say they liked the stadium better when it was open , few complain about the Big A , which has become the place to meet . If you want to congregate before a Rams game , Angels game or anything at Anaheim Stadium , look for the Big A . `` It 's a good symbol for a meeting place , '' Sean Stiemlee of Huntington Beach said during the Angels ' recent home stand . `` I 've been to 12 stadiums and it 's one of the best things about this stadium . `` The big , iron A . . . It works as a meeting point . You can see it from anywhere . No one can miss it . '' The Big A , which is 234-feet tall and weighs 240 tons , has had problems since July 17 , 1979 , when it was moved . At that time , approximately 1,000 people watched as contractors used a 125-ton crane , two huge dollies and lots of cable to move the Big A . But as a moving experience , it was all too brief . The Big A made it about 10 feet when a dolly under its base started to tilt . That put the engineers and stadium officials on edge -- as well as the Big A . Adjustments were made and the Leaning Tower of Anaheim finally made its 1,290-foot trip across the parking lot . The plan was to use the scoreboard to announce upcoming dates and advertise stadium events . At first , it worked fine . But by 1984 , the scoreboard was shut down because of performance problems . But you ca n't read the scoreboard while you 're standing under it . Anaheim 's little Eiffel Tower provides shelter when it rains , and shade in the summer -- the Big A regulars move east with the shadows for their picnics -- and it 's a great reference point for finding lost cars . Plus , it has the advantage of being near the Katella Avenue entrance/exit , which offers the easiest freeway access , on the east side of the stadium . It 's a perfect meeting place for a big group . During the recent home stand , Unisys and TRW were among those having employee picnics under the Big A. Steve Gillepie of Mission Viejo even likes the concrete base of the structure . `` It 's a great place to barbecue because of the raised cement , '' Gillepie said . And although it 's illegal to drink alcohol in the parking lot , many of the people under the Big A take the risk . `` They 're usually pretty lax about it for Angel games , '' Gillepie said . `` For Rams games they 're a little more up-tight and they might take it away , but they usually leave you alone if you pick up your trash . '' While the party goes on under the Big A , the argument goes on inside the stadium whether the enclosed structure is better for baseball games . `` I like it better the old way , '' John Avella of El Toro said . `` It gave the stadium more . . . personality . '' Others disagree . `` I like it better this way , '' Mike Nabrotzky said . `` I like a fuller stadium . There 's less wind and I think the ( crowd ) noise reverberates . '' Others do n't care , just as long as the Big A stands . `` I helped construct this thing in high school , '' said a man who would only identify himself as Steve because neither his wife nor his boss knew that he took a day off to go to an Angel game . `` We worked on it during summer vacation . It was fun growing up in Anaheim then . We saw Disneyland go up and then this . ''