Scott Fortune has been feeling sick to his stomach . However , that 's a positive sign for Stanford 's volleyball team . Fortune , the Cardinal 's do-everything hitter from Laguna Beach , has a penchant for suffering abdominal misery shortly before -- and sometimes during -- the most important matches of his career . Last summer in Seoul , for instance , Fortune was stricken with food poisoning four days before the United States played the Soviet Union in the Olympic gold-medal match . Fortune , a backup middle blocker for Team USA , missed the semifinal against Brazil . But with his stomach still gurgling , he came off the bench in the final and put away match point to secure the gold as the United States defeated the Soviets in four games . And last Saturday , suffering from a stomach virus that required sprints to the restroom between games , Fortune had 33 kills and 20 digs as Stanford defeated Hawaii in five games to win the Western Intercollegiate Volleyball Assn . regional qualifying tournament at Loyola . The victory earned Stanford its first berth in the National Collegiate Athletic Assn . 's Division I Final Four , which begins tonight at Pauley Pavilion . Stanford ( 24-5 ) , ranked second in the final regular-season poll , will play ninth-ranked Ball State ( 17-12 ) of Muncie , Ind. , at 5:30 . Top-ranked UCLA ( 27-5 ) will play 11th-ranked Penn State ( 16-10 ) in the other semifinal at 7:30 . `` I still had a hard time keeping food down last night , '' Fortune said the other day . `` This could be a good omen . '' UCLA and Stanford , which split two conference matches this season , are expected to advance to Saturday night 's final . But plenty of good Fortune will be required if Stanford is to become the first school other than UCLA , USC , Pepperdine or San Diego State to win a national title -- especially with UCLA the host school . The Bruins have won 12 national championships under Coach Al Scates since the NCAA began sponsoring men 's volleyball in 1970 . They are 18-0 in playoff matches at Pauley . `` We 're in a good position to win it , but Stanford should be favored , '' said Scates , who is in his 27th season with the Bruins . `` Stanford has more firepower than anyone . You ca n't ignore anybody on that team . '' Least of all Fortune , a 6-foot-6 senior who was a first-team All-American middle blocker for the Cardinal in 1987 before red-shirting so he could train full-time with the national team . Marv Dunphy , who coached Team USA before returning to Pepperdine this season , called Fortune `` the most receptive kid I have ever coached . '' Practicing daily against the best players in the world developed Fortune 's skills . It also instilled a commitment to perform at a peak level regardless of the strength of the competition . `` It 's something I learned last year playing with Karch ( Kiraly ) and Steve Timmons , '' Fortune said . `` Right from the start , when I got back to Stanford I tried to establish a different , more serious attitude than there was in the past . '' Fortune , a former All-Southern Section player at Laguna Beach High School , was one of several talented recruits -- among them 6-6 junior middle blocker Dan Hanan of Edison High in Huntington Beach -- culled by Stanford Coach Fred Sturm in the last five seasons . The influx of talent has helped Stanford overcome its reputation as nothing more than a token member of the powerful WIVA . It also has allowed Sturm flexibility . Fortune , 23 , was moved from middle blocker to the outside this season so the team could benefit from his hitting and passing . `` He 's a more polished volleyball player , a more intelligent volleyball player and he 's playing a larger leadership role , '' Sturm said . Fortune has responded to the switch by leading Stanford in kills , with 6.9 a game , and digs , with 2.9 . He also shares responsibility for turning a Cardinal team that was 11-19 overall and 5-13 in conference last season into a unit that finished 17-3 in the WIVA and tied UCLA for the conference title . `` It was kind of frustrating on the national team , always hearing guys from UCLA , USC and Pepperdine saying , 'Stanford ? You guys were terrible and did n't deserve to be in the league , ' `` said Fortune , who was the only member of the Olympic team with collegiate eligibility . `` Winning a share of the league title was like vindication . '' Fortune said that Stanford wants to avenge the decision that forced the Cardinal to win the qualifying regional while UCLA was given a bye into the Final Four . Because of a scheduling error , Stanford would have exceeded the NCAA match limit in a season had the Cardinal played a one-match playoff . UCLA was granted its bid simply by winning a coin-flip . An NCAA championship would be a crowning addition to Fortune 's collection of championships , which already includes Laguna Beach High 's Southern Section title in 1983 and the Olympic gold he won in 1988 . `` Stanford has been the butt of a lot of jokes , '' Fortune said . `` We 're going to try and change that this weekend . '' Even if it makes him sick .