The Rev . Jesse Jackson registered to vote in the District of Columbia on Thursday , but shed no new light on a possible run for mayor . Jackson has previously said he is `` not running '' for mayor in the nation 's capital . `` I have no plans to run for mayor and there is no office for mayor or any other office in D.C. open in 1989 , '' Jackson said Thursday . But he has refused to rule out entering the race later . He and his wife , Jacqueline , spent about 10 minutes filling out a series of forms and registered as Democrats , according to city elections officials . After registering , Jackson said Washington would be the focal point of his national political agenda , which includes improving education , fighting drugs and gaining statehood for the District of Columbia . 'Be of Service ' '' I want to be of service to the people of the nation and Washington , D.C. , '' Jackson said . `` Washington , D.C. , is the point of challenge today for an urban policy for the nation . '' City law requires that mayoral candidates be registered to vote in the district at least one year before the general election . The next election is scheduled for Nov. 6 , 1990 . Jackson has said he would never run against Mayor Marion Barry Jr. , an ally from the civil rights movement , but after Barry declared he would seek a fourth term , Jackson refused to take himself out of consideration . The two-time Democratic presidential hopeful has said he was moving to the nation 's capital to be closer to the legislative process . The national offices of the Rainbow Coalition , a poor people 's advocacy group Jackson founded , is scheduled to open offices here in September . Jackson 's Chicago office said Thursday that he has moved into a three-bedroom apartment , where he will live until a house he has bought has been renovated . While the law does not require that a mayor also be a registered voter , only registered voters can compete in primary elections , said William H. Lewis , general counsel to the elections board . Jackson has said he has no plans to sell his Chicago home .