Roger Morris ' diatribe against former President Richard Nixon ( `` While Tittering at Nixon , Do n't Underestimate the Web He Wove , '' Op-Ed Page , March 5 ) can best be understood in terms of a subject neither Morris nor The Times , in its biographical blurb , saw fit to mention . It is impossible to discuss President Franklin Roosevelt without reference to the Depression , or President Lincoln without mentioning the Civil War . That Morris managed to get through four columns on Nixon without mentioning the central event of the Nixon years , the war in Vietnam , is particularly fascinating in view of Morris ' own actions as a member of the Nixon Administration at a fateful moment during that war . In 1970 , American and South Vietnamese forces were suffering terrible and unnecessary losses at the hands of communist troops who for years had been attacking from privileged sanctuaries in Cambodia . President Nixon ordered the sanctuaries cleared out , a move which objective historians of the war concede saved untold American and South Vietnamese lives and shattered the communists ' offensive capacity in the region for two years . Your blurb about Morris neglects to mention that he was serving on the National Security Council staff at the time of the Cambodian incursion . What did he do when President Nixon ordered an attack on the sanctuaries ? He quit . He , and many others , made the absurd claim that by depriving communist troops of the wherewithal to kill Americans and South Vietnamese , Nixon was `` widening '' the war . During 1973-75 , congressional support for Saigon evaporated , and Soviet support for North Vietnam escalated . It is no surprise , therefore , that the South ultimately could not prevail . In Vietnam the new communist regime has driven half a million souls to their deaths in the South China Sea , and in Cambodia 1 million to 2 million have perished in an awful holocaust . Someday , we as a nation will have to come to terms with what happened in Indochina when American authority was withdrawn . I do n't expect Morris to help us solve that problem . But I would suggest that The Times should have seen fit to inform its readers that its correspondent was not a dispassionate historian but a man who has a personal interest in debunking Nixon . For if history proves him right about one of the most controversial and fateful decisions of his presidency , where will that leave Morris ? Speaking of history , I wonder whether Morris ' column contains an example of his historical method . He writes of a virtual chorus of `` ridicule and . . . dismay '' among conservatives about Nixon 's just-published White House memos and then , to prove his point , quotes from a single column by James Kilpatrick . That 's the only negative statement I 've seen or heard from a conservative about the collection , and I suspect I read and talk to more conservatives than Morris does . On the other hand , after reading the same book , the New Republic 's Hendrik Hertzberg wrote , `` The last eight years have made Nixon look good in unexpected ways . Reading his memos , one has to admire his formidable intelligence , his analytical sharpness . . . his vast knowledge of politics and government . '' Using Morris ' technique , I would define this as `` a vast outpouring of praise from the former President 's erstwhile critics . '' JOHN H. TAYLOR Assistant to President Nixon Woodcliff Lake , N.J .