A decade ago , Rick White wrote a master 's thesis on the business of baseball . Today he is one of baseball 's most successful businessmen . For four years , the former Southern Californian has presided over soaring sales of official baseball memorabilia -- everything from traditional caps , pennants and baseball cards to more exotic orange Orioles beaks and Angels air mattresses . White is president of Major League Baseball Properties , which licenses souvenirs and apparel bearing major league team insignia . The former Chapman College student returned to Orange County on Friday for an annual convention of 350 memorabilia makers , culminating with today 's All-Star game at Anaheim Stadium . According to sports business observers and competitors , White deserves much of the credit for transforming the memorabilia business from a marginal operation to a major source of revenue and improving Major League Baseball 's financial fortunes in the process . `` There 's been phenomenal growth in the sale of baseball souvenirs , and Rick White has been the main reason , '' said Brent Diamond , publisher and editor of Team Licensing magazine , which monitors sale of paraphernalia sponsored by professional sports teams . `` He 's the marketing force that 's driven almost all of their recent success . '' Major League Baseball turned a profit for the first time in decades in 1986 and has remained in the black ever since . From 1986 to 1988 , league attendance jumped 11.5 % , and radio and television revenue increased 33.5 % . But the gains in attendance and broadcast revenues are dwarfed by growth in sales of official baseball merchandise . In 1986 , retail sales of Major League licensed goods totaled $ 225 million . The figure soared to $ 700 million in 1988 and is expected to top $ 1 billion this year . Major League Baseball , including the 26 teams and the commissioner 's office , gets about 4 % of that total and then divides it based on an undisclosed formula . This year 's expanded sales put baseball ahead of the National Football League , which has long dominated the memorabilia market , according to White . Frank Vuono , senior director of licensing for the NFL , said it is unclear whether Major League Baseball is now the leader . The NFL declines to disclose its souvenir royalty revenue . `` That sort of thing is hard to measure , and we do n't release any figures , '' said Vuono . `` But Rick has done a tremendous job in centralizing and developing their business . . . and most retailers say we 're about even . '' White , 36 , began his career with Major League Baseball after completing a `` regression analysis '' of baseball salaries for his master 's thesis at Purdue University . `` We figured out that Hank Aaron should earn the most , and he did , '' said White , who had been an all-star catcher at La Mirada High School and student body president at Chapman College in Orange . `` Sometimes you have to prove the obvious . '' After a short stint as a public relations officer for baseball 's umbrella organization and then as an assistant branch manager with Carnation Co. , White went back to work for Major League Baseball in 1979 . He was assigned to Major League Promotions , the forerunner of Major League Baseball Properties . `` Things were somewhat sloppily run then , '' said White . `` Commissions varied radically , and the league , the teams and everybody else marketed the goods . ( Then baseball commissioner ) Bowie Kuhn did n't want to clog up the game with a lot of commercialism . '' When Peter Ueberroth took over as commissioner in 1984 , however , things changed . Under pressure from both players and owners , Ueberroth centralized souvenir sales within Major League Baseball . Paraphernalia sales had been paired with an unprofitable media operation , which was spun off as Phoenix Communications in 1985 . A former Time Inc. executive , Charlie Bear , was hired as a consultant for the new souvenir sales group , and an overall marketing plan was adopted . `` We found the money teams were making ( on memorabilia ) , even after a World Series , would n't even pay for a utility infielder , '' White said . `` Peter allowed us to make a change . He did n't tell us how to do anything but said we had to create some sort of strategy . '' Bear and White worked together to forge a marketing plan , which was designed to follow the NFL strategy of centralized sales , publicity and trademark enforcement . `` They got a late start and learned from the NFL 's mistakes , '' said Diamond at Team Licensing magazine . `` They 've seen by far the most growth , largely because Rick put together a good marketing program . '' Under the new plan , Major League Baseball assumed responsibility for stopping counterfeit goods . When the program began back in 1986 , shipments of unlicensed foreign-made baseball products were turned back at the borders , and retailers were assured that they would not be undersold by makers of inferior products who cut separate deals with team owners . Around the same time , Major League Baseball also dumped 25 % of its former licensees and began seeking more established producers . In the last 2 1/2 years , the organization has spent more than $ 6 million to police and prosecute counterfeiters . `` We want to establish ourselves as an upper-end producer , '' White said . `` So we are opening our own stores and are working with major department stores . '' As part of that move , the league last year began sponsoring the Diamond collection of authentic major league style apparel and the Cooperstown collection of historically accurate uniforms . Last year the league opened five Major League souvenir and apparel stores , in San Diego , Oakland , New York , Pittsburgh and Milwaukee . It plans to open two more by the end of 1989 -- one in Brea and one in Boston . The stores sell parkas , towels , sheets and even wallpaper , as well as more traditional items . In the future , White said , Major League Baseball Properties will begin more joint ventures with players and increased marketing of such collectibles as baseball cards and old jerseys . Asked if anything could dampen demand for Major League-sponsored goods , White mentioned counterfeiting , over-saturation of the market , and , of course , a players ' strike . `` We do n't play baseball , we do n't make money , '' he said . `` It 's that simple . ''