Officials of the California Department of Insurance advise consumers to take several precautions when buying and maintaining insurance policies : * Determine whether the salesperson is an agent or a broker . Insurance agents are the representatives of the companies whose policies they sell . Insurance companies are obligated to honor the promises of their agents if a client can document that money was given to the agent in good faith . Brokers are legally the customer 's representative , and insurance companies are not obligated to make good on brokers ' claims . However , since they agreed to do business with brokers , many companies will honor claims in cases of broker fraud . * Before giving an agent or broker money for a premium , obtain a written binder naming the insurance company . this serves as temporary proof of insurance until receipt of an official policy . Receipts for any money given to a broker for an insurance premium should also be obtained . * Insist on an official policy from the insurance company within 30 days after a deposit . If a policy is not received , the broker or agent should be contacted immediately . * If there are doubts about coverage , contact the insurance company directly . Most insurance companies have a customer-service division that can verify coverage . * If a cancellation notice is received , for any reason , contact the broker or agent and ask whether coverage is still valid . If the representative says it is , written proof should be obtained . Again , doubts can be resolved by contacting the insurance company directly . * If a company advises that insurance coverage has been canceled , demand a refund from the broker or agent and notify state authorities at the Los Angeles investigations bureau of the state Department of Insurance , ( 213 ) 736-2560 . * To resolve any doubts , ask the Department of Insurance about the reputation of a broker or agent before beginning business dealings . The department can confirm whether a representative is licensed , which insurance companies have agreed to sell policies through that person , and how long he or she has been in business . The state can also advise consumers if disciplinary action has been taken . The number of the licensing division is ( 916 ) 322-3555 .