The woman loved mirrors and had placed them lavishly around her apartment , where she lived alone . Normally an easygoing , sociable type , she seemed agitated one day and finally confessed to her visiting sister that her house mates made her angry . They never returned her friendly greetings . Later , her doctor listened sympathetically and explained to the woman 's family that such delusional beliefs -- springing from an inability to recognize people -- are common in patients with Alzheimer 's disease , a degenerative brain disorder . Alzheimer 's disease afflicts 2.5 million to 4 million Americans and is a type of senile dementia , a broad disease category that also includes other types of organic brain disorders . Although he usually cautions against reinforcing delusions , her physician , Dr. Stephen L. Read , medical director of the John Douglas French Center , a facility for Alzheimer 's patients in Los Alamitos , suggested draping the mirrors . `` I 'm almost embarrassed to admit I did this , '' he said recently . `` But she got better . She believed the people were still there , but she felt a lot better because they were n't looking at her all the time . '' Read 's anecdote , relayed at a recent medical conference , reflects the challenge facing Alzheimer 's disease researchers and physicians . For them , focusing on science alone -- searching for the cause , diagnostic methods and treatments -- is n't enough . They must also create common-sense solutions to help ease the often nightmarish lives of patients and those who care for them . And they must alert care givers about behavior changes , a phenomenon not yet completely understood . In the last decade , the ranks of Alzheimer 's disease researchers has swelled from a handful to more than 500 nationwide , estimated Zaven Khachaturian of the National Institute on Aging at a recent conference sponsored by the John Douglas French Foundation for Alzheimer 's Disease , Los Angeles . Research funding has increased from $ 90 million last fiscal year to $ 130 million in 1989 , according to Claire McCullough , an NIA spokeswoman . Despite that explosion of interest and infusion of funds , scientists are still not certain about what causes the disorder , first described in 1906 . At autopsy , the brains of Alzheimer 's patients show two abnormalities : plaques , clusters of degenerating nerve cell ends , and tangles , masses of twisted filaments that accumulate in previously healthy nerve cells . And there is as yet no definitive treatment for the disorder , marked by memory loss and personality changes , communication difficulties and time disorientation . Still , a number of research avenues may ultimately help unlock the puzzle . While some researchers focus on the origin of the disease , others are investigating better diagnostic methods . And others are zeroing in on psychosocial aspects . Research presented at the recent conference , along with investigations at the Alzheimer 's Disease Research Center at USC , one of 10 NIA research centers nationwide , have shed light on a number of areas . The long-term debate over the cause of Alzheimer 's disease continues , with scientists suggesting genetic , viral and environmental origins , or a combination . Activation of some genetic factor is probably responsible , Dr. Leslie P. Weiner , USC chair of neurology and professor of microbiology , told conference participants . `` There 's no hard evidence for the viral theory , '' Weiner claims . Fewer researchers today espouse the viral theory than in the past , Read believes . The idea that a viral infection causes brain cell death `` remains a theoretical possibility , but there is very little experimental evidence , '' he said . In addition , some researchers now believe that there are different forms of the disease . In a study of 100 Alzheimer 's patients , David Freed , psychologist on staff at the USC Alzheimer 's Disease Research Center , identified three subgroups . One subgroup has a loss of nerve cells containing acetylcholine ( a type of `` messenger '' brain chemical called a neurotransmitter ) in the basal forebrain . Another group has loss of nerve cells with norepinephrine , another neurotransmitter , in the brain stem , and may also lack acetylcholine . In another subgroup , Freed found movement changes , including tremor and rigidity , and he speculates there may be a loss of nerve cells containing dopamine . This form of the disease is thought to result from long-term exposure to workplace toxins such as metals and solvents , Freed said . Another USC researcher , Dr. Helena Chui , associate professor of neurology , is studying how the plaques form and has developed two hypotheses . Something may go awry in the nerve cells themselves , or the plaque may originate from the blood vessels . `` The capillaries in Alzheimer 's disease patients are very irregular , '' she said . In her studies of autopsied brains , she has found some capillary parts in the plaque . Another researcher , Dr. Carol Miller , USC associate professor of pathology and chief of neuropathology , is using molecular probes to determine exactly which nerve cells are affected in the disease and to track the pattern of progression . Among other questions she 's investigating : Does the disease have identical progression from one patient to another ? And how do healthy nerve cells differ on a molecular level from affected ones ? Meanwhile , other researchers are trying to find better diagnostic methods . Definitive diagnosis of Alzheimer 's disease is only possible , experts say , by biopsy , a procedure rarely done for the disease , or by autopsy . But several less invasive techniques are yielding diagnostic clues as well . An imaging technique called SPECT ( single photon emission computerized tomography ) is `` the best noninvasive procedure we have for making the diagnosis of Alzheimer 's disease , '' claims Dr. Ismael Mena , director of the division of nuclear medicine at Harbor/UCLA Medical Center , Torrance , and a UCLA professor of radiological sciences . When memory loss is the presenting symptom , Mena said , SPECT can help determine whether it 's due to stroke , depression or Alzheimer 's . In the procedure , a radioactive isotope is injected into a vein and an hour later an image is taken of the brain . From the computerized brain picture , the clinician can study the perfusion of blood into the the brain 's temporal and parietal lobes . Reduced blood flow into both temporal and both parietal lobes is `` a fingerprint of Alzheimer 's disease , '' Mena said , but not of depression or stroke . Since early 1988 , Mena has used SPECT on more than 100 Alzheimer 's patients and predicts its use will increase dramatically , partly due to the recent availability of new and better imaging agents . Also under study as a diagnostic method is the computerized electroencephalogram , a tracing of the brain 's electrical activity . In healthy people , brain waves in the alpha range predominate and wave frequencies do n't change much with age , explained Dr. Cyrus K. Mody , clinical instructor of neurology , and Dr. Hugh McIntrye , professor of neurology , both at Harbor/UCLA Medical Center . But in Alzheimer 's patients , alpha waves decrease and are replaced with slower delta or theta waves . The computerized EEG technique correctly diagnosed all but one of 50 patients in a recent study at Harbor/UCLA , according to researchers there . The method can also evaluate severity , say the scientists , with greater changes suggesting more advanced disease . Currently , several teaching hospitals and about four Los Angeles area hospitals perform the computerized EEGs for Alzheimer 's detection . Other researchers are piecing together typical behavior patterns and psychiatric symptoms of Alzheimer 's patients . Delusional beliefs such as those affecting the interior decorator are common , Read finds . `` Families often consider the beliefs trivial in talking to doctors , '' he said . Patients often believe someone has stolen everyday objects like wallets or purses and accuse the vague `` they . '' Some patients who no longer recognize a spouse `` accuse the care givers of not being there when in fact they are present 24 hours a day . `` Sometimes a delusion is really an unconscious response to an environment that has become very much too complicated for a patient , '' he said . In general , Read advises family and friends not to reinforce delusional beliefs , but acknowledges that in the case of the interior decorator , he successfully broke his own rule . Behavior changes vary greatly , he finds . Besides having delusions , patients might become more out of touch , more listless and dependent , act more childishly or become cruel or mean-spirited . Not all Alzheimer 's disease patients become more agitated as the disease progresses , Read said , although that stereotype flourishes . Some become more passive ; some display more self-centered behavior . Agitation is more common in patients who have had the disease longer , Read said . Another common behavior , wandering , can provoke anxiety and exhaustion in family members and nursing home staff , especially when patients escape from home or facility . But wandering is believed to be a coping mechanism , a way to adjust to altered perceptions of the environment , and perhaps a response to loneliness , said Lynne Morishita , director of the Center for Geriatric Health at Century City Hospital and UCLA assistant clinical professor of nursing who also spoke at the conference . Most likely to wander , she finds , are patients who tended to pace or fidget in their younger days . As Alzheimer 's disease becomes more well-known by the public , physicians face another dilemma . Aware of the disease , older Americans begin to worry about becoming a victim . `` A lady came to see me recently because she ran a red light , '' Read said . `` We spend a fair amount of time undiagnosing Alzheimer 's disease these days . '' And according to the experts , the patient who says to his doctor , `` I think I have Alzheimer 's disease , '' almost never does .