In their first public appearance since the March 10 bombing of their van on a La Jolla street , Navy Capt . Will Rogers III and his wife , Sharon , said Friday that she will not return to her fourth-grade teaching position at La Jolla Country Day School . The Rogerses , speaking at a news conference , sharply denounced the exclusive , private school for bowing to what apparently was an act of terrorism . Under a severance agreement , Sharon Rogers , who taught 12 years at the school , will receive a lump sum of $ 135,000 , plus $ 5,000 for her legal fees , and will not return to the campus , where school officials believe her presence would pose a risk to students and faculty . The FBI has been investigating the bombing as a possible reprisal for Capt . Rogers ' order to shoot down an Iranian passenger jet that neared his ship , the guided missile cruiser Vincennes , in the Persian Gulf last summer . All 290 people aboard the plane were killed . 'Simply Just Disappointed ' '' Over the past weeks , I have felt many different emotions , but today I am simply just disappointed , '' said Sharon Rogers , fighting back tears . `` More disappointed than I can possibly express . I will miss my relationship with the school . But most of all I will miss my students and their courageous and thoughtful parents . '' Both Capt . Rogers and his wife said they believe the van bombing was an act of terrorism . Mrs. Rogers added that the school , by barring her from campus , was sending out a message that it was bowing to terrorism . `` I feel very sad for our country , '' she said . Bernie Fipp , president of the school 's board of trustees , said in a letter Friday to the school 's parents and staffers that safety was the prime reason for the school 's decision that Mrs. Rogers not return to teach her fourth-graders . `` The school believed and continues to believe that Sharon 's presence on campus would pose an unreasonable risk to the children at the school , '' Fipp said . `` The school believes that the presence of the 24-hour federal protection now being offered to Sharon is evidence of the risks involved . '' School Action Criticized The school , with 700 students and 67 teachers , has been the subject of intense criticism , both in San Diego and across the country -- including a pointed comment from the White House -- in the weeks since the attack . One of the toughest questions facing the school administration was why it moved so quickly to remove Sharon Rogers from the faculty , without waiting to see whether the FBI determines that the bombing was indeed a terrorist act . Agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation , other than confirming that the explosive device was a pipe bomb , have declined to reveal the status of their continuing probe . Sharon Rogers was not injured in the van blast . Feeling a jolt and thinking that her van had been hit from behind , she had jumped from the van moments before it was engulfed in flames . But she described that incident as a `` life-altering event , '' highlighted by the ensuing battle over whether she would be allowed to return to her job . Sharon Rogers and her husband were escorted to the press conference at a Mission Valley hotel by a large contingent of security officials from the Naval Investigative Service . She wore a red dress and he wore a blue blazer and red slacks . When they sat down before the microphones , the security officers posted themselves at both entrances to the room and in the parking lot as well . Sharon Rogers maintained that the school would be secure with her there because of the added NIS protection . `` I think they would be very safe with the NIS agents there , '' she said . Timothy M. Burns , the school 's headmaster who came under sharp criticism from some parents and teachers over his handling of the Rogers affair , could not be reached for comment Friday . Richard Roth , a Pasadena public relations specialist hired by the school , said the 18-member board 's vote Friday morning `` was not unanimous but overwhelmingly in favor of approval '' of the decision to sever ties with Sharon Rogers . He said that the headmaster normally approves or rejects teaching contracts without board action . `` But this was not a contract issue , '' Roth said . `` This was a legal issue , and it 's appropriate for the board to take up matters of legal consideration . '' Asked why the board agreed to pay her $ 135,000 , when her current contract is for $ 32,400 annually , Roth said : '' We want to avoid a legal action . Instead of paying legal fees ( from a lawsuit ) , we believe it is more appropriate to provide Sharon with this compensation . '' After the bombing , the school told Mrs. Rogers not to return to the campus for the rest of this school year . Faced with criticism for making her a victim a second time , the school offered her two contract options for the school year beginning in September . Both were contingent on being assured that safety concerns could be met . Sharon Rogers submitted a counterproposal , asking for $ 200,000 over five years if she were prevented from returning to school because of safety concerns . Capt . Rogers said he is disappointed in the way the school treated his wife . But he said he is proud of the way she held up after suffering the horror of having a terrorist `` light a fireball under her van . '' `` She 's a lady of iron , '' he said , placing his arm around her shoulders whenever she choked back tears . `` There 's a lot of grit here . '' Both Sharon Rogers and her husband said they are convinced that the bombing was a terrorist strike . `` I think that someone in the dead of night put a bomb on the undercarriage of my van , and , whoever that person was , is a terrorist , '' Sharon Rogers said . Her husband added : `` I think they will run aground , and they will be brought to justice . Whether it 's a state-sponsored act or an individual act or a disgruntled sailor , whatever it will be , it will all come to light . `` Even if it 's a high school kid experimenting with a PVC bomb or the Revolutionary Guard , the problem is there . It 's terrorism , no matter how you cut it . '' But he said he had fully expected the school to welcome her back . He also said he sympathizes with his wife for the intense media and community scrutiny she has faced . `` I had the misfortune of being at the center of my 15 minutes of fame earlier , '' he said , referring to his decision to shoot down the Iranian plane . `` But time does heal a lot of things . And you take a step at a time . So I was very disappointed when the reaction on the part of the school occurred . '' Although Mrs. Rogers said recent events have dramatically changed her life , she said she plans to begin seeking work at another school in the San Diego area . `` I 'm going to start pounding the pavement next week , '' she said . `` I 'm going to update my resume and hit the bricks on Monday . ''