Once again , ad nauseam , Nixon is being `` rehabilitated '' by his nostalgic admirers and a bemused press . Conrad , as usual , is right on target in satirizing this latest resurrection of our disgraced ex-President . What puzzles me , as a retired Foreign Service officer , is Nixon 's reputation as a foreign policy guru , which rests largely on the puffery that surrounded his not-so-surprising restoration of relations with China . Otherwise , he has been associated with some notable fiascoes . As President Eisenhower 's reputed expert on Southeast Asia , our then-vice president pushed for us to replace the French when they were forced out of Vietnam by the 1954 debacle of Dien Bien Phu , while he ignored any possible understanding with Hanoi . Later , his decision to bomb Cambodia appears to have been part of a sequence of disasters that led to the genocidal scourge of Pol Pot . Was the slaughter of millions of Cambodians part of his `` peace with honor '' ? On Iran , did Nixon foresee that our overthrow of Premier Mohammed Mossadegh in 1953 might eventually lead to the fanatical revolution of 1979 ? What led him , as President , to believe that the vain , mercurial shah could be our effective surrogate in maintaining peace in that troubled area ? Has Nixon ever regretted our 1954 ouster of the leftist Arbenz government of Guatemala , which led to a series of brutal military dictatorships and to the loss of more than 100,000 lives ? The same deviousness and amorality that entangled Nixon in Watergate characterized his foreign policy maneuvers . By using his national security adviser , Henry Kissinger , as de facto secretary of state , he was able to avoid Congress ' traditional scrutiny of cabinet members . This finally led him to use the NSC for action purposes , as in the CIA 's apparently successful overthrow of Chilean President Salvador Allende in 1973 , which almost certainly became the precedent for the supreme folly of Irangate . This institutional perversion persists , with President Bush frequently relying on his NSC staff to perform missions that should logically fall to our resident ambassadors or to the secretary of state and his deputies . MARSHALL PHILLIPS Long Beach