Justice Department lawyers have vigorously denied that they have engaged in any misconduct in prosecuting espionage charges against former FBI Agent Richard Miller . In January , attorneys for Miller claimed in a motion filed in U.S. District Court in Los Angeles that charges against him should be dismissed because prosecutors intentionally withheld information that could benefit Miller 's defense . But in their response , prosecutors maintain that the defense motion `` is wholly without merit . '' The defense has conveyed `` a false sense of conspiracy and wrongdoing on the part of the government , '' according to the brief filed by Assistant U.S. Attys . Russell Hayman and Adam Schiff . The defense motion , prosecutors contend , is `` a rehashing of . . . old issues with a new face , '' contentions that were rejected by U.S. District Judge David Kenyon , who presided over Miller 's two trials and the trial of Soviet spy Svetlana Ogorodnikova , with whom Miller had an adulterous affair in 1984 . Miller , 52 , was tried on espionage charges twice , with the first trial ending in a hung jury in 1985 . The next year , a jury convicted him of trading a secret FBI manual to the Soviet Union for sex , money and a Burberry trench coat . It was the first time an FBI agent had been convicted of espionage . The conviction was overturned by the U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals last April and he was released on bail last October . Miller says he was not a spy but was attempting to revive his lackluster FBI career with an attempt to infiltrate the KGB . Kenyon removed himself from the case and U.S. District Judge Robert M. Takasugi took over . Miller 's third trial is scheduled to begin July 10 . Much of the government response deals with a July , 1989 , letter sent to FBI Director William Sessions by a lawyer for former FBI Agent John Hunt . Hunt was a witness in both of Miller 's earlier trials . The letter urged Sessions to investigate possible FBI misconduct in the case . The letter claimed that the FBI omitted from Hunt 's investigative reports on the case information that was favorable to Miller . `` All of the issues raised by '' Miller 's January motion `` have been aired '' during the earlier trials , the prosecutors retorted . `` The defense has long been aware of Mr. Hunt 's view '' that his report had been inaccurately summarized and `` has cross-examined him on this issue in all proceedings . '' The prosecutors also maintain that the FBI conducted an in-depth investigation of the case . `` The fact that the FBI did not back away from a prosecution of one of its own agents is a clear testament to its objectivity and single-minded pursuit of the criminal actors , '' the prosecution response states . Moreover , the prosecution motion maintains that much of the information contained in the letter from Hunt 's lawyer , Lynn Sarko of Seattle , tends to incriminate Miller rather than exonerate him . And the prosecutors state that they have turned over to Miller 's lawyers all relevant information that could aid his defense . In reply , Joel Levine , one of Miller 's lawyers , asserted that prosecutors have `` mischaracterized many of the things we were attempting to say . '' He said that a number of issues were raised by the July , 1989 , letter that the prosecutors did not deal with in their response . Levine and his co-counsel , Stanley I. Greenberg , said they plan to file a detailed written reply and hope that Judge Takasugi will grant a hearing so that the issues they have raised can be further explored before Miller 's trial . Takasugi is scheduled to hear the misconduct motion on June 11 .