In a major revision of what is considered one of the toughest rent-control ordinances in the nation , the Santa Monica Rent Control Board will allow landlords to roughly double the rents on some apartments if they set aside an equal number of units for low-income tenants at lower rates . Members of the rent control board , which approved the changes Thursday night , and landlord representatives said at a joint press conference Friday that the voluntary program addresses the two major problems facing rent control today : making inexpensive housing available to poor people while providing landlords with a fair return on their investment . `` It 's a workable compromise , and it 's recognition that after 10 years of a restrictive ordinance , financial incentives are needed for the landlord , '' said Carl J. Lambert , president of Action , a Santa Monica landlords group . Susan Packer Davis , chairwoman of the rent control board , said that while the board has agreed to allow sizable rent increases for some vacated apartments , the poor , the elderly and disabled people for whom rent control was originally intended to help will be protected . `` We 're still being idealistic , but finding a pragmatic way of achieving our goals , '' she said . Both sides agreed that a change was needed . Landlords have left as many as several thousand apart ments vacant rather than rent them out at what they considered unreasonably low rates . Meanwhile , many high-income professionals -- some paying thousands of dollars in under-the-table `` finder 's fees '' -- were moving into two- and three-bedroom apartments near the beach for less than $ 500 a month . `` We needed to do something to keep rent control viable and to be more responsive to the needs of the 1990s , '' said Wayne Bauer , a rent control board commissioner . Renters make up 80 % of Santa Monica 's 90,000 residents . Of the estimated 40,000 rental units , 34,000 are subject to rent control . The average monthly rent is slightly under $ 500 . In Effect Sept. 1 The so-called Voluntary Inclusionary Housing Program , which will go into effect Sept. 1 , was first proposed in 1984 . The City Charter was then amended to permit such a change in the city 's rent control ordinance , which was adopted into the City Charter in 1979 . But it was only in February that the board adopted a program . It allowed landlords to raise rents on a number of apartments equal to those set aside for low-income and `` very low-income '' tenants . Landlords were allowed a $ 300 increase for apartments set aside for low-income tenants , and a $ 500 increase for units guaranteed for very low-income tenants . Low-income tenants are those making less than 80 % of the area 's median income ; very low-income residents are those making less than half of the median . A family of four would qualify as low-income if it had a total annual income of $ 30,400 ; it would qualify as very low-income with a total annual income of $ 19,950 . Increases Dismissed Landlords ignored the program , however , dismissing the increases as minimal and objecting vehemently to a provision that required them to record the agreement with the title to their property for 30 years . Landlords said this would lower the value of their property . Recognizing that the program was not working , members of the rent control board began negotiating with landlord representatives two months ago and agreement was reached last week . `` This is an olive branch that is being offered from each side , '' board member Bauer said . The program approved Thursday night allows larger rent increases under the same one-to-one ratio for low-income units . It also contains a provision that could reduce rents for some low-income tenants , something the old ordinance did not provide . Unlike the earlier program , it does not require any changes in property titles . Rate Schedule Rents for the apartments set aside for low-income tenants would be determined by a rate schedule tied to a percentage of the area 's median income , or by the apartment 's current rent , whichever is lower . For example , a family of four with an income of $ 30,400 is assured of renting a three-bedroom apartment for no more than $ 618 , or a family of four with an income of less than $ 19,950 could rent a three-bedroom unit for $ 412 . `` We tried to ensure that low-income people would pay no more than 30 % of their annual incomes , '' said Mary Ann Yurkonis , administrator of the rent control board . `` We 're trying to ensure that the affordable units go to the people who need them the most . '' In exchange for guaranteeing units for low-income tenants , landlords will be able to raise rents on other vacated apartments by $ 400 and $ 900 , depending on the size of the apartment and whether the unit set aside is for a low- or very low-income tenant . Extra Incentive There is an extra incentive of $ 100 per month for setting aside a low-income unit for a tenant with children , and an extra $ 50 per month for a low-income tenant with a pet . The higher rates will put Santa Monica more in line with prevailing rates in other Westside communities . Craig L. Marcus , a Grubb & Ellis Co. investment property broker , earlier this year released a study on apartment rents in the Westside that showed the average rent for a two-bedroom apartment in Westwood was $ 1,500 a month . Because most of the units under rent control in Santa Monica are older , Marcus said , they will have to be substantially refurbished to get rents close to $ 1,500 a month . Hopes for Program Supporters of the program are hoping that with higher profits , landlords will refurbish their buildings , some of which have been allowed to deteriorate . There is also hope that many of the apartments that landlords decided to keep vacant -- an estimate that ranges from a handful to several thousand -- will return to the housing market . Santa Monica Mayor Dennis Zane , a rent control advocate who disputes the notion that a significant number of high-income tenants live in rent-controlled apartments , called the program a step in the right direction . `` Prior to now , rent control could only provide security to existing renters and low-income renters already in the community , '' Zane said . `` We now have the ability to provide greater assurances in the long run of a mixed demographic environment . '' REVISIONS TO RENT CONTROL LAW THE OLD LAW Under the rent control law in effect since 1979 , rental units are treated essentially the same regardless of the tenant 's income . The Rent Control Board has limited annual rent increases to an average of 4.5 % per year for 10 years . The result is that the average monthly rent in Santa Monica is $ 480 , far below the prevailing rate in nearby parts of Los Angeles . Critics of the law say the biggest beneficiaries of the law have been high-income professionals , whose rents have been kept artificially low . City officials also believe that dissatisfied landlords are keeping as many as several thousand rental units in Santa Monica vacant rather than rent them at the low rates . THE NEW LAW The new law is designed to give landlords a financial incentive to rent to poor tenants , particularly the elderly , families with children or people with handicaps . The law will allow landlords to raise the rent substantially on apartments when they are vacated . In return , the landlords would be required to set aside an equal number of apartments for low-income renters . The amount of rent the landlord forgoes by renting to the low-income tenant would be more than offset by increases on the `` deregulated '' apartments . Officials hope the incentives will encourage landlords to rent many of the vacant units that are now being kept off the market . Who qualifies The law establishes two categories of poor tenants , `` low-income '' and `` very low-income , '' as defined by federal formulas . Examples : In Santa Monica , a family of four is classified as `` very low-income '' if it makes less than $ 19,950 a year and `` low-income '' if it makes less than $ 30,400 . Monthly rents for poor tenants would be determined by the tenant 's income and the size of the apartment . For low-income tenants , the rent could be as low as $ 399 for a one-room apartment and as much as $ 618 for one with three bedrooms . For very low-income tenants , the range would be $ 266 to $ 412 . The incentives For each vacated unit set aside for a low-income tenant , landlords would be allowed to raise the rent as follows on vacated units rented to regular tenants : Single -- $ 400 One bedroom -- $ 500 Two bedrooms -- $ 600 Three or more bedrooms -- $ 700 For each vacated unit set aside for a very low-income tenant , the following increases would be allowed on vacated units rented to regular tenants : Single -- $ 600 One bedroom -- $ 700 Two bedrooms -- $ 800 Three or more bedrooms -- $ 900 Example : A landlord has two vacancies at the same time in one-bedroom apartments , each now earning the citywide average of $ 480 per month -- giving him a monthly total of $ 960 . Under the new law , he rents one to a very-low income tenant for $ 320 . In return , he is able to raise the rent on the other apartment to $ 1,180 -- giving him a monthly total from the two apartments of $ 1,500 .