Increasing numbers of college students want to serve their communities . Some help homeless people find shelter and services . Others tutor children or teach the illiterate how to read . Now a coalition of more than 40 California colleges and universities , public and private , has agreed to help these students to help others . The California Compact , as it is called , plans to work with communities to identify the problems on which students could work , try to win foundation support for these volunteer programs , and get faculty members as well as students involved . It 's a gift of commitment that should not go unnoticed . The California Compact has just been launched as part of a national effort called Campus Compact , which is sponsored by the Education Commission of the States and has been in existence for several years . The California group is co-chaired by Stanford University President Don Kennedy and UCLA Chancellor Charles E. Young , and includes among others the University of Southern California , Occidental College , Claremont McKenna College , Los Angeles City College , the California State University system and the University of California campuses . The James Irvine Foundation has just announced a $ 120,000 donation over the next three years to enable private universities to participate in the compact . It 's just this kind of program that California legislators sought to foster when they passed a bill sponsored by Assemblyman John Vasconcellos ( D-Santa Clara ) . That measure encouraged students to work 30 hours a year in their communities and urged their colleges to help them , in part by providing academic credit for some of their work . The efforts have gotten under way despite the governor 's unwillingness to spend the $ 240,000 needed to help organize the program . In announcing the organization of the compact , UCLA 's Chancellor Young said recently that government resources may continue to be scarce , `` but our human resources are potentially unlimited . '' He said that the colleges want to help build a `` citizenry of problem solvers . '' People who have studied college life have said for years that higher education could be made more meaningful if it inculcated in young Americans the value of public service . The California Compact aims to make that recommendation a reality .