The state and Exxon Shipping Co. had not reached agreement late Thursday on conditions under which the crippled tanker Valdez will be allowed to enter state waters for repairs , primarily because of disagreement over the wording of a demand stipulating that no discharge from the vessel enter the waters . At issue was the definition of discharge and the company 's inability to guarantee that discharges from the damaged ship would not affect state waters , a source close to the proceedings said . Meanwhile , divers hired by Exxon to remove six steel plates dangling from the ship 's hull late Thursday were trying to begin working on the tanker , now drifting 7 to 10 miles northeast of San Clemente Island . Rough swells were hampering the efforts , the U. S. Coast Guard reported . Meeting Here Tuesday A state Assembly committee on oil spill prevention and response , formed after the Valdez disaster in Alaska and three subsequent spills , said it will meet in San Diego on Tuesday to hear testimony about the condition of the Valdez since it arrived offshore July 9 . Negotiations between the state and Exxon continued late into the night , but were not expected to be completed until today . A state demand that Exxon post a $ 20-million line of credit for liability , in case it breaks the agreement , was not a critical point of debate , the source said . He added that he was uncertain whether the amount had been negotiated . Representatives of several state agencies , including the Lands Commission , Department of Fish and Game and Regional Water Quality Control Board , met early Thursday morning and talked with Exxon officials later that afternoon , officials said . `` There are several balls in the air at the same time , '' Anthony Summers , a deputy state attorney general , said early Thursday . Exxon officials would not comment on the negotiations , saying only that the company 's objective is to come up with something it and the state `` can live with . '' A clause in the state 's 12-page list of conditions , issued to Exxon on Tuesday , stipulates that `` there shall be no discharge of waste from the Exxon Valdez into or affecting ( state ) waters . '' Exxon officials indicated during Thursday 's meetings that , because of the ship 's damaged hull , they could not guarantee that no discharge of any kind would occur , the source said . The ship would enter state waters -- which extend 3 miles from the coast -- to remove the plates , reach dry dock in San Diego Bay or both . Sporadic Discharges The Valdez is believed to have caused an 18-foot slick that tests showed contained equal parts of weathered crude oil and marine life . Last week the ship sporadically discharged small amounts of a bluish substance from its starboard side . But no discharge has been seen since Sunday , the Coast Guard said , although the tanker is still a suspect as the cause of several sheens spotted earlier this week about 13 miles south of it . The state has also demanded that Exxon concede that the 987-foot tanker dumped oil during its 2,200-mile trip to San Diego from Alaska . But company officials have been reluctant to make such a concession , describing the discharges and the 18-mile slick as `` organic material '' with a `` hydrocarbon content . '' Exxon officials have maintained that the oil content in the discharges was probably caused by the scouring effect of the sea on the lower depths of the Valdez 's tanks , which still held a waxy residue of oil and had not come clean in Alaska . Samples taken from the ship 's tanks , from discharge from the tanker and from sheens sighted near the ship are being analyzed , and results are expected within several days . Offshore , divers hired to remove the steel plates from the hull entered the waters around the tanker , but were forced out by rough swells of up to 7 feet , the Coast Guard said . Permission to Move The ship was expected to move late Thursday to calmer waters closer to shore . Coast Guard Cmdr . Don Montoro gave Exxon permission to move to waters within 6 miles of the coast , said Lt. Larry Solberg . Neither the federal agency nor Exxon was certain when the plate removal could begin , or whether it could be accomplished under open-seas conditions . Removal of the plates , which peeled back from the hull during the trip from Alaska and now prevent the ship from entering San Diego Bay for repairs , could take five to seven days . The plates jut down as much as 70 feet from the bottom of the ship . `` We still think it 's a legitimate option . But obviously , we want the divers to be safe , '' said Jan Cool , a spokeswoman for Exxon Shipping . The divers had tested the waters Wednesday , and an emergency drill required by the Coast Guard to test the response of the Valdez crew and equipment was completed Thursday , after a supply and recovery boat ready to handle oil discharges or spills was deployed , officials said . The recovery boat , a salvage vessel operated by the diving company and three tugboats that towed the Valdez from Alaska now surround the drifting ship . Drill Goes Well '' The drill was satisfactory . Everybody on scene agreed the equipment provided by Exxon . . . was adequate to be able to handle any pollution incident , '' Solberg said . `` So as long as ( the divers ) have assessed that it 's safe to do the operation , we 've given them permission to do it . '' Exxon 's Cool said Wednesday that , although some plate removal might be done outside state waters , the ship still will need to enter the coastal zone to finish the removal or for follow-up repairs . But no matter where the plates are removed , the ship will face state scrutiny when it enters San Diego Bay , she said . The tanker was towed from Alaska after hitting a reef and causing the nation 's worst oil spill , along the Prince William Sound shoreline . The ship was scheduled to enter San Diego Bay on July 11 for a $ 25-million , nine-month repair job at National Steel & Shipbuilding Co. , which built the vessel in 1986 . But the discovery July 10 of the jutting plates , as well as the slicks and discharges , delayed its entry .