Volleyball players from UCLA and Stanford played semifinal matches Friday night in the NCAA Division I Final Four with their minds on the same thing : Each other . UCLA swept Penn State , 15-6 , 15-4 , 15-9 , and Stanford beat Ball State , 15-13 , 8-15 , 15-9 , 15-13 , before a crowd of 2,192 at Pauley Pavilion . UCLA will attempt to win its 13th national championship , and Stanford will try to become the first team other than UCLA , USC , Pepperdine and San Diego State to win the title when the Bruins and Cardinal meet tonight at 7:30 . `` It 's like the same thing with the Soviets and the U.S. in the Olympics , '' said Stanford hitter Scott Fortune , who was a reserve for Team USA at Seoul last summer . `` They were expected to meet in the final . It 's the same scenario with UCLA and us . `` We 're even teams ; I do n't think anyone has an advantage over anyone else . '' With its win over Penn State , UCLA extended to 19 games its unbeaten streak in playoff games at Pauley . Tonight , Stanford is hoping to recapture the form that propelled the Cardinal to a three-game victory over the Bruins on April 19 during Western Intercollegiate Volleyball Assn . competition . But to do that , Stanford will have to beat a determined Bruin team that looked overpowering against Penn State . `` I think it 's impossible not to have them ( Stanford ) in the back of our minds , '' UCLA hitter Trevor Schirman said . `` but we made it a point to come out here and beat Penn State first . '' UCLA hit .419 and committed just 16 errors while dominating the 11th-ranked Nittany Lions from the outset . Matt Whitaker led UCLA with a match-high 21 kills and an attack percentage of .690 . Chris Chase had 17 kills for Penn State , which hit just .179 . `` Tonight was a very good team effort , '' UCLA Coach Al Scates said . `` there was good blocking , and we 're going to need it against Stanford . '' Stanford , which qualified for its first Final Four appearance by beating defending national champion USC and Hawaii last weekend , served and passed inconsistently early in its two-hour match with ninth-ranked Ball State . Fortune had a match-high 29 kills , and Dan Hanan added 18 for the Cardinal . The two players , both 6-foot-6 , also presented a formidable blocking barrier . Ball State 's Kevin Furnish , who entered the match as the nation 's leading hitter ( .454 ) was limited to eight kills and an attack percentage of just .160 .