Richard Nixon has been the most visible political personality during the last four decades . Historians will long debate his role and achievements ; Nixon undoubtedly will both fascinate and repel them , as he did his contemporaries . Most certainly , he will be noted in the history texts as the first ( and , one hopes , the last ) President of the United States to resign because of scandal . Nixon also is unique in that following his resignation in 1974 , Congress declared presidential papers public property , and provided they be made available , with proper limitations on national security , personal and family matters . For 13 years , Nixon resisted compliance with that law and fought to maintain control of what he insisted were `` his papers . '' In one case , Justice John Paul Stevens called Nixon an `` unreliable custodian '' of his papers . Finally , in 1987 , after the former President exhausted his appeals , the National Archives released 4 million of its holdings of more than 40 million pages . This volume contains approximately 1,000 documents , with maybe one-tenth written by Nixon himself . Apparently , the collection has as many memos by Charles Colson as by the President . `` Secret Files '' may amuse and titillate more than illuminate . The petty , vindicative thoughts of the President and his aides predominate ; at other times , the subject matter is obscure or incomprehensible , except perhaps to scholars familiar with the details of the Nixon Administration . Too few documents provide `` dramas of global significance , '' as the editor promised ; instead , they are outweighed by `` episodes of banality , baseness , and humor . '' Bruce Oudes ' introduction briefly assesses Nixon 's career , but mainly focuses on the controversy surrounding his papers . Unfortunately , Oudes has offered little to guide and inform the reader about the authors or the meaning of various memoranda . For example , he has reprinted the `` smoking gun '' tape transcription ( by now , a familiar item ) from the June 23 , 1972 , Nixon-Haldeman conversations , yet the casual reader will find it difficult to decipher the heart of the Watergate cover-up in that seemingly cryptic , disjointed talk . A number of entries refer to the `` 5 o'clock Group . '' How many know that these White House aides met almost daily at that hour to decide how to `` play '' stories in the media ? Documents are the raw material of history . But a presidential memo is not always historically significant . Indeed , most are trivial or repetitious , and this volume abounds in both . Documents must be shaped into a narrative of context , with analysis and explanation ; otherwise they are meaningless and bewildering , as they often are here . The reader will struggle to find Nixon memoranda relating to substantive policies . Instead , the selections basically depict the ceaseless campaigner , ever-worried about capturing another vote , and insatiably tending to self-promotion and the `` PR '' aspects of his presidency . After he returned from China , Nixon bombarded his aides with memos about Panda bears , the public display of his gifts from Mao and how they should play the media regarding his successful dealings with Chinese leaders . The first entry , written by Nixon two weeks before his inauguration in 1969 , directed chief aide H. R. Haldeman to develop plans for collecting campaign funds for 1972 . In the next few days , Nixon asked for an analysis of the 1968 campaign , fretted about future leaks of information , demanded that aides audit the columns of unfriendly journalists and pursued the details of plans to celebrate the 10th anniversary of his famous `` kitchen debate '' with Nikita Khrushchev . The President-elect thus established a typical pattern for the next four years . Nixon 's admirers often point to him as a `` hands-on '' President . At the outset he instructed Haldeman `` that I be informed as to what action has been taken and , if action is not taken , why the decision has been made not to take it . '' But endless memoranda regarding imagined enemies , the media and White House entertainment , or the preoccupation with Howard Hughes and the Kennedys , overshadow such nuggets . Must we really know Nixon 's musings regarding wine selections ? Why include a three-page Haldeman memo on Mrs. Nixon 's choices for films at Camp David ? Or a secretary 's note to Colson , merely noting the attachment of a transcript from a Gary Hart press conference ? Given the editor 's fascination with memos relating to Colson 's questionable political dealings , he should have explained why the President , in a letter to Colson , spoke of June 3 , 1974 , as a `` terribly sad and difficult '' day . Indeed it was -- for Colson had just been sentenced for obstruction of justice . ( Colson , incidentally , derided George Bush 's losing effort against Lloyd Bentsen in 1970 . Bush , Colson complained , had resisted negative ads , `` ignored the social issue and tried to be more liberal than Bentsen . '' ) The Nixon Archives are striking for the comparatively few Nixon papers available for the period after his key aides , Haldeman and John Ehrlichman , resigned in April , 1973 . Oudes has noted this discrepancy , and thus can provide only 30 pages to the tumultuous year of 1973 , and merely three Nixon notes for 1974 -- the most familiar , and probably most interesting , period . ( Alexander Haig , Haldeman 's successor , managed to remove most of his papers from the Administration records ; they might well reveal more of this crucial time . ) The dearth of Nixon material for the height of the Watergate crisis probably indicates the extent of the President 's intense private preoccupation with the affair . Ironically , the lack of documents serves Nixon in his final campaign , a campaign that minimizes Watergate and maximizes his policy achievements . In 1974 , he predicted that Watergate would only be `` a footnote in history . '' In 1988 , he characterized Watergate as a `` small thing , '' echoing the line of his press aide in June , 1972 , when he dismissed the break-in as a `` third-rate burglary . '' Egil Krogh , the head of the `` Plumbers , '' who served the President with another illegal break-in , and John Mitchell , Nixon 's attorney general , knew that Watergate was more . Krogh acknowledged that the Plumbers had struck at the very basis of individual freedom , and Mitchell noted that Watergate included the `` White House horrors '' that had permeated Nixon 's first term . Appropriately , the House Judiciary Committee and a good part of this nation concluded in the summer of 1974 that `` Watergate '' involved a consistent pattern of presidential abuses of power and obstruction of justice , and thus left Nixon with the unhappy choice of resignation or impeachment . `` Secret Files '' offers some glimpses into that `` underside '' of the Nixon Administration , but barely hints at the agony attending its fall . `` Footnote '' indeed . Nixon resigned in part because of his role in the Watergate cover-up . Ironically , he and his aides left a wide documentary trail that exposed those misdeeds . Those records will provide future historians with a rich lode of material to elaborate that story , as well as the positive achievements of the Nixon Administration .