Amid assurances that the trip will be safe , Exxon officials announced Monday that they intend to tow to San Diego next month the oil tanker that ran aground off the Alaskan coast in March , causing the biggest oil spill in U.S. history . Exxon Shipping Co. President Frank J. Iarossi said the Exxon Valdez will be brought from Alaska to undergo $ 25 million in repairs at the National Steel & Shipbuilding Co. yard on San Diego Bay where the Valdez was built in 1986 . Nassco President Richard Vortmann said the job will take about nine months and will create 300 new jobs at the shipyard . Workers are expected to repair an area in the ship 's hull 700 feet long and 100 feet wide , Iarossi said , which will require 3,000 tons of steel , about 10 % of the ship 's total steel weight . Acknowledging the environmental concerns caused by the ship that spilled 11 million gallons of oil when it struck a reef and polluted about 730 miles of shoreline in pristine Prince William Sound , Iarossi went to unusual lengths to offer assurances that the Valdez is now `` environmentally safe . '' 'Truly Sorry ' Iarossi began a press conference by saying that `` we at Exxon are truly sorry for the circumstances that led to today 's announcement . '' He said that both the outside and inside of the ship have been cleaned and all remaining oil removed from the tanks , clearing the way for towing of the ship to the Nassco yard . `` In the past two months , we have been very active in clearing the oil residue from the tanks and exterior of the vessel , '' said Iarossi , who said that the Coast Guard has inspected the ship and certified that there is no oil in the tanks . Petty Officer Bill Ball , Coast Guard spokesman in Valdez , said that the ship 's tanks `` are fairly clean '' and added that Coast Guard officials are currently reviewing Exxon 's request for a permit to tow the vessel to San Diego . 'Safe Transit ' '' We have not approved a permit for the vessel to proceed just yet . . . . We 're concerned that there is a safe transit with no chance for pollution , '' Ball said . Company officials said they expect to get towing approval later this month , and it will take four tugs about 20 days to tow the Valdez during the 2,500-mile trip . The tugs will follow a course that will keep the Valdez at least 100 miles offshore , Iarossi said . The Valdez will not fire up its engines during the trip , he added . In Anchorage , meanwhile , the former captain of the Exxon Valdez pleaded innocent Monday to Alaska felony charges of criminal mischief stemming from the spill . If convicted on all three counts of second-degree criminal mischief , Joseph Hazelwood could face up to 15 years in jail and $ 150,000 in fines .