Wildlife officials are proud of their work at the Grizzly Island Wildlife Area . Their herd of tule elk has grown to more than 100 since seven from the Owens Valley were introduced to the area in 1977 . And the herd is still prospering . River otters still swim playfully in the meandering waterways , home also to giant white sturgeon and striped bass . Eagles and hawks soar over sprawling wetlands that support millions of giant-sized jack rabbits , all wide-eyed and alert to the dangers of the territory . Nature 's ways are evident . But man 's are becoming increasingly evident , too , which concerns officials . They say rampant development results in overcrowding and pollution . Furthermore , the growing inability of hunters and fishermen to provide adequate funding for wildlife management and land acquisition makes it more difficult to protect the fragile areas . `` We have 28 million ( people in California ) going to 40 million by the year 2010 , '' Director Pete Bontadelli said . `` Clearly the pressures on wildlife are greater than anything we 've seen before . '' Given these projections , Bontadelli said the state 's ability to manage existing wildlands , and the opportunity to make future land acquisitions , is becoming more restricted . In short , revenue is n't keeping up with the rising costs of wildlife management . The grizzly bear , California 's proud symbol of strength , is long gone , and officials fear more species native to the state might also become extinct . The kit fox , bald eagle , and peregrine falcon , to name a few , are endangered . Fortunately , through bond issues over the years , Californians have helped the state set aside about 400,000 acres of precious wildlife habitat , which Bontadelli said supports many of these endangered and threatened species . He claims , however , that such land is becoming more difficult to maintain . Another problem DFG officials might have to address in the near future involves a proposed cap on federal aid to the various states for wildlife management . If the proposal -- included in the Reagan administration budget for fiscal 1990 -- is passed by Congress , there would be $ 100-million caps on both the Dingell-Johnson and Pittman-Robertson funds , federally relegated funds that support the states ' wildlife agencies . The fund , which began in 1937 , raises money through taxes on sporting firearms and ammunition . In the last fiscal year , it raised $ 119 million for state agencies involved with wildlife restoration and hunter safety . The Pittman-Robertson fund is credited with creating modern game management agencies in the states . The Dingell-Johnson program , which began in 1950 and was expanded in 1984 under the Wallop-Breaux Act , raises money by taxing fishing tackle and boats . It raised $ 179.5 million last year . Among other things , the money is used to acquire and improve habitat and restock species wiped out by excessive hunting or poor land-management practices . The comebacks of the whitetail deer , wild turkey and wood duck , as well as the native brook trout and the cutthroat trout , can be traced to the two programs . In a statement released by the White House , President Bush said he would recommend to Congress that `` the funds be used for the purposes intended . '' Said Bontadelli : `` We 're hopeful that Congress will not allow ( the cap ) to take affect . At this point , it 's in Congress ' hands . '' In any case , Bontadelli emphasized that the department needs more money to assure the quality of wildlife for future generations . Some help has come through the California Wildlands Program . It was dedicated at Grizzly Island Feb. 13 under the slogan : `` Save Our Wild Places , '' and is expected to be in full operation by April 1 . Aimed at increasing the state 's revenue by charging visitors -- not just hunters and fishermen -- to nine major wildlife areas , the program is being hailed by conservation groups . `` Habitat loss is the greatest overall threat to California 's wildlife , '' said Richard Spotts , California representative of Defenders of Wildlife . `` Traditional hunting and fishing revenues have not kept pace with the mounting conservation challenges . '' Tim Egan , president of the California Waterfowl Assn. , said : `` We 're hoping that with this new program , and others like it , the rest of the public is going to make their contribution or else we 're going to lose a lot of resources we do n't want to lose . '' Egan said only about 290,000 acres of wetlands are left in California , down from millions years ago . Suisun Marsh , which surrounds the DFG-managed Grizzly Island , has shrunk -- through erosion , reclamation and agricultural and industrial development -- from 750,000 acres to 85,000 . `` Through the North American ( Waterfowl Management ) plan ( a joint United States-Canada effort ) we 're trying to reestablish wetlands area in California and North America , '' Egan said . `` Now they 've got a money stream that 's going to help us create more wetlands . '' Most of the support , however , will come from sales of annual and daily wildlife passes , at $ 10 and $ 2 , respectively , and native species stamps , which can be bought at DFG offices and sporting goods stores . The passes will enable visitors at any of these wildlife areas `` to see first-hand , enjoy , watch and photograph such wildlife as tule elk , bald eagles , river otters , white pelicans and flocks of waterfowl in a natural setting . '' As George Gamble of the California Trappers Assn . put it : `` It 's time for nonconsumptive users to lend their support . '' Wildlife interpreters , as well as photography blinds , nature trails and posted descriptions of wildlife are included in the price . The eight other reserves are : The Lake Earl Wildlife Area in Del Norte County ; Ash Creek Wildlife Area on the Modoc-Lassen County line ; Gray Lodge Wildlife Area in Sutter and Butte counties ; Los Banos Wildlife Area in Merced County ; Elkhorn Slough Ecological Reserve on the Monterey Peninsula ; San Jacinto Wildlife Area in Riverside County ; Upper Newport Bay Ecological Reserve in Orange County and the Imperial-Wister Wildlife Area in Imperial County . The Grizzly Island Wildlife Area lies in the heart of Suisun Marsh , named years ago by the Patwin Indians who used to hunt and fish here . The `` Land of the West Wind , '' as it is appropriately called , is home to 200 species of birds , 45 species of mammals and 36 types of reptiles and amphibians . The sprawling tidal wetlands are one of the country 's most important . As much as 25 % of the state 's wintering waterfowl might be concentrated here at one time . Short-eared owls , ring-necked pheasants and ducks of all varieties -- there are 150 private hunting clubs in the area -- are part of the scenery , as are numerous birds of prey , including the majestic golden eagle . The tule elk , one of 20 herds in the state , graze on prickly lettuce and grasses and , being excellent swimmers , can at times be seen crossing with grace the many sloughs and waterways that wind through the wetlands . During mating season , the bulls put on an impressive display of bugling and knocking horns in competition for their prospective harems . Though prospering now , these animals serve as a reminder of how reckless disregard for wildlife can lead to the inadvertent extermination of a species . Tule elk are native to this area , but were wiped out during the Gold Rush by the 49ers , who , according to wildlife supervisor Dennis Becker , `` took away their habitat and used the animals for hides and food . '' The present herd is but one example of how , with proper management , a species can be saved from extinction and managed effectively . The question now , however , is whether the Wildlands program will gain acceptance among the public and provide the necessary funds . `` We are very comfortable that in the first 18 months we can generate at least $ 5.6 million , '' Bontadelli said . To do that , the department must sell 200,000 outdoor passes and 100,000 native species stamps , a goal Bontadelli believes is realistic . `` In the long term , I think that 's where we need to be , '' he said . `` It will also provide a funding base for the marine mammal program , threatened and endangered species programs , fisheries ( management ) and much of our non-game program in wildlife management . So this is critical for our wide variety of species ' needs and management objectives for the department . ''