The race : Insurance commissioner : Whose ads ? Democratic candidates Bill Press , John Garamendi and Conway Collis . Press has a new 30-second commercial that attacks two leading opponents , Garamendi and Collis , as servants of special interests -- Garamendi of insurers and Collis of corporate donors . Garamendi has a 30-second commercial that pledges to make every insurance company obey Proposition 103 . Collis has a 30-second commercial that reports he scored highest on a Ralph Nader questionnaire of the insurance commissioner candidates . Ad : Press ' commercial declares , `` As a state legislator , Garamendi took over $ 100,000 from the insurance industry . And now he 's been endorsed by the insurance industry 's lobby . As an elected official , Conway Collis took money from corporations and voted them millions in tax breaks . Maybe that 's why the Democratic Party rejected them and endorsed Bill Press . . . . Bill Press . He 's on our side . '' Analysis : Garamendi has taken at least $ 123,000 in his 16 years in the Legislature from insurers , a little under $ 8,000 a year , but he has not taken anything from them since announcing for insurance commissioner , and he repudiated the endorsement of the legal reform group that Press is referring to here . That group , the Assn . for Tort Reform , has been accused of being a front for the industry but is not its major lobby . Collis , before 1986 , did take thousands of dollars in contributions from corporations while occasionally voting as a State Board of Equalization member to allow them to pay less taxes than the board staff recommended . Since 1986 , he says , he has changed his policy and will not vote on any matter relating to a party from which he has received a contribution . He acknowledges some oversights , but he maintains he has `` learned '' to be a better elected official in recent years . What Press does not say in these ads is that , much more than either Garamendi or Collis , he has raised money in the insurance commissioner 's campaign from one of the major special interests in the insurance issue , the trial lawyers . Those contributions now amount to at least $ 273,500 . Press does have the official endorsement of the Democratic Party . Ad : Garamendi 's commercial says that `` Roxani Gillespie , the Republican insurance commissioner , exempted hundreds of companies from Prop . 103 's requirement to lower insurance rates . We need an insurance commissioner who will fight for the people ! Democratic Sen. John Garamendi ! Sixteen years ' experience standing up to big corporations . '' Garamendi then follows the announcer and says , `` As insurance commissioner , I 'll make every insurance company obey Proposition 103 . '' Analysis : Gillespie indicated last summer she would exempt hundreds of companies from Proposition 103 rollbacks , but later reversed herself and left the issue open . She has not yet made a single final decision on a rate rollback for any company . Garamendi , as a state senator , has earned a reputation for standing against many special interests , although he has also voted for many bills desired by corporations , as virtually all legislators have . The last sentence is a promise Garamendi has made in his campaign . He has repeatedly vowed to `` clean up the insurance mess , '' language similar to that used by most of the other Democrats . Ad : Collis ' commercial starts with him reiterating that he would be the toughest enforcer of Proposition 103 , but then an announcer declares : `` We interrupt this message to bring you a special announcement . Ralph Nader has just announced the results of a consumer survey of candidates for insurance commissioner . In this survey , Conway Collis scored No . 1 . '' That news is repeated four more times in the next few seconds , and Collis appears once more in the midst of the repeats saying , `` I 'll do whatever it takes to make 103 work . '' Analysis : Collis scored highest , edging candidate Ray Bourhis , in answering a Nader questionnaire on policies he would follow as commissioner . But several other leading candidates , including Garamendi , Press , Walter Zelman and Republican Wes Bannister , refused to answer the questions on grounds that the survey was prepared to favor Collis . Nader has stopped short of endorsing Collis . As for making Proposition 103 `` work , '' this may be more in the hands of the courts than the insurance commissioner .