Actor BURT REYNOLDS , who has been living mainly on his Florida ranch since selling his bachelor pad in Holmby Hills last summer , has leased a newly built home in the Bel-Air area for a year at $ 40,000 a month . `` He took the lease because he has a new series that is about to begin filming right away , '' said Bobbi Ward of Asher Dann & Associates , who represented Reynolds in the lease but would n't divulge its value , which came from other sources . Reynolds is the star and co-executive producer of the new fall CBS series `` Evening Shade , '' about an ex-football pro who returns to his hometown to raise a family . `` Burt leased the house without ( his wife , actress ) LONI ( ANDERSON ) knowing , but when she saw it , she loved it , '' Ward said . They entered a lease option for an additional year . Anderson was in Italy during July for a TV remake of `` Three Coins in a Fountain , '' and she will be one of a handful of hosts for `` Who 's Minding the Kids ? , '' a week of educational , back-to-school TV programs starting Aug. 27 on the A & E cable network . `` Burt rented it ( the house ) completely furnished , '' Ward said , `` but he put his own artwork in it . He has an extensive collection of fine art , but he also has a lot of Western art . '' The home , which she described as a gated , two-acre compound with many security features , has a San Fernando Valley view , swimming pool and tennis court . He 's putting Astroturf on the tennis court , so his son Quinton , 23 months , can use it as a playground , and he 's baby-proofing the pool , Ward said . The 15,000-square-foot main house has eight bedrooms and 11 baths , including a guest/staff apartment with a kitchen and a living room . There is also a guest house . `` You have to drive to that , '' she said . The home also has a master suite with what Ward termed `` his and hers TV sets '' and `` incredible closet space . '' `` Loni has a black belt in shopping , according to Burt , '' Ward said with a chuckle . The home was built by its owner , Jay Steinbeck , who recently constructed 15 $ 1-million-plus houses in the master-planned Brentwood community of MountainGate . Steinbeck was represented in the lease by Linda May of Mosler , May , Deasy & Doe . Model/actress/recording star ROSEANNE VELA has purchased a home off Beverly Glen near Mulholland Drive in an area where Jack Nicholson , Warren Beatty and Marlon Brando live . Vela co-stars with Nicholson in `` The Two Jakes , '' which opens this Friday . She has appeared on the cover of Vogue 14 times and has recorded an album with A & M Records , which is due out in early 1991 . She bought a white contemporary villa with French doors and a swimming pool for $ 750,000 . She was represented by Kurt Rappaport and Chris Furie of Prudential Rodeo Realty . Martin Genis of Douglas Properties represented the seller . The Taj Mahal is on the market , but it 's not the one in Agra , India . It 's the one in the San Francisco Bay . It 's a houseboat that looks like a floating Taj , and is the weekend home of Deborah and William Harlan . Docked in the Sausalito Yacht Harbor at a cost of $ 2,500 a month , the 200-ton-plus houseboat is a combination of Mogul and Moorish architecture , with its white , slender towers , graceful arches and onion-shaped domes . The 4,500-square-foot houseboat has two domes , instead of one like the Indian landmark , but the cut-out fascia above its entrance was copied from a portal of the original Taj . The long boardwalk leading to the houseboat even resembles the lengthy approach to the famous mausoleum . The houseboat also has such features as a sauna , whirlpool tub , wine cellar , four fireplaces , two kitchens , three bedrooms , four baths and an elevator to service three levels of living . `` But its back yard is the bay , and that 's why the Harlans are selling it ; they have two little babies , and that does n't work on a houseboat , '' said Mary Lou Castellanos . She shares the $ 2.5-million listing with Debi DeCello at Pacific Union Co. , a San Francisco residential brokerage firm that William Harlan co-founded . He is also co-owner of the Merryvale Vineyard in the Napa Valley . The Bel-Air mansion that the SULTAN OF BRUNEI decided not to buy in February because of the radon discovered there has been purchased by a member of the royal family of Saudi Arabia , sources not involved in the deal said last week . The home has 25 bedrooms in 36,000 square feet , including a guest house , chauffeur 's and housekeeper 's quarters , and a number of bedrooms under the tennis court , a realtor noted . The property had quietly been marketed at $ 25 million and was sold to a Saudi prince , just before the current Middle East crisis for slightly more than the sultan was going to pay for it , the sources said . The sultan had the house in escrow for eight months at $ 18.5 million before radon was discovered there . `` The radon problem was really minor , so I 'm sure it was taken care of , '' said a home inspector familiar with the house . The house was built five years ago on a four-acre site purchased from former media magnate WALTER H. ANNENBERG for $ 2.9 million , the realtor said . Before he bought the Bel-Air house , the Saudi prince had been negotiating to buy Merv Griffin 's 157 acres in the Santa Monica Mountains , he added . That property is listed at $ 20 million with Steve Lewis of Jon Douglas Co. 's Beverly Hills office , but he would not comment .