American Savings Bank , created 18 months ago out of the ashes of the collapsing Financial Corp. of America in Irvine , purchased the failed Huntington Federal Savings & Loan on Friday for $ 1.5 million . Huntington Savings ' two branches , with $ 114.2 million in deposits , will reopen Monday as American branches , Dianne Nelson , an American spokeswoman , said . `` This acquisition is consistent with our retail banking strategy to fortify our statewide branch network in our key market areas , such as Orange County , '' said W. Brent Robinson , executive vice president and director of American 's retail banking . `` We expect this to be a very smooth transition for these customers . '' American has two branches in Huntington Beach among its 178 branches statewide . Nelson said there are no plans to merge Huntington Savings ' two branches into the existing branches . Huntington 's 27 employees will be retained , she said . American also is picking up $ 6.4 million of the institution 's assets , primarily cash and consumer loans , and will have the right over the next 60 days to buy $ 104.1 million in remaining assets , mainly home loans , from the Resolution Trust Corp . The RTC is the government agency that has been operating Huntington Savings since regulators declared the thrift insolvent and seized it on Feb. 9 . The agency predicts that Huntington 's collapse will cost the RTC about $ 4.5 million . Most of Huntington 's remaining assets are good-quality home loans , said Patrick Pittman , the RTC 's supervisor for the closing . American , one of five bidders for Huntington , has the right to `` cherry-pick '' the remaining assets over the next 60 days , he said . Owen Blicksilver , an American Savings spokesman , said the giant thrift , with $ 16 billion in assets , picked up the tiny S & L because it had `` significant franchise value . . . and consumer loyalty . '' Of the deposits American bought , about $ 76.2 million are considered core deposits , which are smaller accounts from local residents who are less likely than big account holders to move their deposits to other thrifts . American 's $ 1.5-million payment is essentially 2 % of core deposits . To gather that much in core deposits through advertising would take a long time and cost 8 % to 9 % of the deposits garnered , Pittman said , adding : '' They got a good price . '' American Savings was itself created from the remains of the bankrupt FCA and its American Savings & Loan unit , once the nation 's largest thrift with more than $ 32 billion in assets . Regulators provided $ 1.7 billion in federal assistance when it sold half the institution to the Robert M. Bass Group in Ft. Worth , Tex . Bass put $ 350 million into the deal . A second institution , New West Savings , was created to hold all the bad assets of the old American Savings and is a self-liquidating thrift managed by Bass personnel . American posted $ 214.2 million in net income in 1989 .