First Executive Corp. canceled a restrictive agreement with its biggest shareholder Thursday , opening the door for ICH Corp. to submit a bid for the once high-flying Los Angeles life insurance company . Meanwhile , First Executive revealed that the Securities and Exchange Commission has launched `` an informal , private investigation '' of the company , which said it is voluntarily submitting documents to the regulatory agency . The SEC inquiry and First Executive 's decision to cancel its so-called standstill agreement with ICH are both apparently related to a number of woes that recently beset the company , including problems with California regulators , a souring junk bond portfolio and a severely depressed stock price . ICH , a Louisville , Ky. , insurance holding company that already owns more than 20 % of First Executive 's stock , said it plans to marshal a `` group '' and make an offer for the now troubled parent of Executive Life Insurance Co. of California before July . ICH has already approached several of First Executive 's biggest shareholders , said Travis Reed , who holds about 4 % of the company 's stock and says he will be part of the bidding group . Reed expects that a company controlled by heiress Caroline Rose Hunt will also join the group . Hunt 's company , Rosewood Financial , already owns about 10 % of First Executive 's stock and has been highly critical of the company 's management . Until now , First Executive 's management and board steadfastly fought several attempts to kill the agreement with ICH , even though some big shareholders argued that it effectively detered all prospective buyers from submitting bids that could enhance First Executive 's market value . Shareholders narrowly defeated a proposal to cancel the standstill arrangement last July , in fact , at the board 's suggestion . First Executive 's directors reconsidered their position Wednesday in light of the company 's market value , said Vice President Allan L. Chapman . Shares , which were as high as $ 17 last year , closed at $ 3.625 Thursday . The stock has been pummeled by a series of events starting with the aborted sale of First Executive 's New York insurance subsidiary early this year . W. W. Acquisition Corp. , which had agreed to buy the unit for $ 460 million , was unable to arrange financing for the deal . First Executive later said the unit was no longer for sale . Then , late last week , the company announced that it would write down $ 515 million in unrealized losses in its $ 6.5-billion junk bond portfolio , resulting in a substantial loss for the year . The company simultaneously announced that it had settled a scuffle with California insurance regulators , who objected to the way First Executive accounted for a $ 750-million pool of junk bonds . First Executive added $ 110 million to its reserve for securities losses last Friday as part of that settlement . The SEC is interested in the charges that First Executive took against its junk bond portfolio , Chapman said . Further details about the SEC investigation were not readily available . The company said these events have caused `` policyholder and agent apprehension '' as well as a slide in its market value that `` in the company 's view , are exaggerated and unwarranted . '' Nevertheless , analysts said any buyout offers that First Executive might attract are likely to be close to the firm 's current market price . And others are skeptical that First Executive will find any serious buyers at all . `` For anyone to make a bid , they would have to have a high degree of confidence that the number and severity of defaults Executive Life would be exposed to ( in its junk bond portfolio ) would be relatively modest , '' said Fred Townsend , principal of Townsend & Schupp , an insurance rating firm in Connecticut . With the economy souring and investors shying away from these high-risk bonds , it seems unlikely that any buyer would offer much more than the company 's current market price , he added . Thomas G. Rosencrants , senior vice president and director of research for Interstate/Johnson Lane Corp. in Atlanta , said he does not believe that any serious bids will emerge for First Executive -- regardless of ICH 's apparent interest in bidding . `` I regard this announcement by First Executive as a sign of desperation , '' Rosencrants said . `` There are such extraordinary uncertainties here that no one will step in to buy it . '' ICH has been struggling with financial problems on its own , he added . And even healthy companies are having difficulty finding financing for takeovers in today 's environment .