A freshman legislator said Monday he will challenge the seating of former Ku Klux Klan leader David Duke when the Legislature convenes in a special session this week . In Metairie , the nearly all-white suburb of New Orleans where Duke was elected , David Sherman , a lawyer who convened a private meeting Monday night , said that a group of citizens would sue , questioning Duke 's residency , if the legislator 's challenge failed . Duke , 38 , defeated home builder and fellow Republican John Treen , 63 , in Saturday 's election for a seat in the Louisiana House , despite endorsements for Treen from President Bush , former President Ronald Reagan and powerful political figures in suburban New Orleans . Workers at Duke 's headquarters said he could not be reached for comment on the challenge . Rep. Odon Bacque , the only registered independent in the House , said he will challenge Duke 's seating on grounds that Duke did not live in the district for a year , as required by law . Opponents said that utility records showed Duke 's condominium had no electricity for the first six months he said he lived there . They noted that papers he filed during his 1988 presidential campaign listed a different address , outside the district . Duke has said he did indeed live in the district and on Sunday dismissed further questions as frivolous . Opponents were unable to get Duke 's name off the ballot before the election because state law limits such challenges to 10 days after a candidate signs up to run . Duke is scheduled to be sworn in Wednesday . Bacque said several legislators have tried to persuade him to change his mind because the publicity would hurt the state . `` Some things are right and some things are wrong , '' he said . `` I have no problem with him being elected if he did it the right way . '' Meanwhile , Gov . Buddy Roemer , in his first public statement on the election , said it reflected the will of the voters in the district . `` In a democracy , that fact must be respected regardless of what one might think personally about David Duke 's philosophical principles , '' he said .