The Los Angeles City Council approved a measure Tuesday under which renters will be paid 5 % interest on the security deposits they are required to give landlords -- interest that could amount to more than $ 60 million between now and 1995 . At the same time , the council tightened the city 's Rent Stabilization Ordinance to prevent landlords from summarily evicting tenants or imposing large rent increases when a baby , a relative or an additional person moves into an apartment . The council 's 10-3 vote on interest payments was considered a victory for tenants , who for years have grumbled about the interest they lose on the sizable security deposits they pay landlords . That measure , expected to take effect in a few weeks , covers only the 470,000 rent-controlled apartment units in the city -- not apartments built after 1978 , single-family homes or luxury units . Only those renters who stay in their apartments for at least a year would qualify for interest payments from their landlord . Lump payments will be made every five years -- or sooner for tenants who move out . Councilman Zev Yaroslavsky voiced a concern echoed by several council members that , because of holes in the city 's Rent Stabilization Ordinance , landlords have been allowed to hang onto the interest earned on money that is not theirs . `` When you take somebody 's money and hold it , you pay interest on that , '' Yaroslavsky said . `` You have to pay the interest because that is the American way . . . . It 's simply what 's right . '' Added Councilman Michael Woo : `` The opposition I hear from some apartment-owner groups highlights the fact for me that over the course of our rent control laws , some owners have come to think of this money as their own . '' Under existing law , the security deposit paid to a landlord must be returned in full two weeks after a tenant moves out -- unless the apartment needs repairs beyond painting , cleaning and normal wear and tear . That provision remains unchanged under the new measure . Dan Fowler , a lobbyist for so-called mom-and-pop apartment owners , argued that the interest payments to tenants are a disguised effort to lower rents in Los Angeles . `` I think the rents are low enough , '' Fowler said . `` Do n't pass these laws . '' Under a rent stabilization law adopted in 1985 , landlords may raise the rent each year based upon the regional inflation rate . The allowable rent increase in recent years has ranged from 4 % to 5 % . Charles Isham of the Apartment Assn . of Greater Los Angeles opposed the measure , pointing out that interest on typical security deposits -- which usually range from $ 500 to $ 1,000 in Los Angeles -- would amount to only $ 25 or $ 50 annually . Isham argued that the interest was not worth the paperwork that would be created to return the money . But proponents -- including several council members -- pointed out that a poor person or senior citizen who accumulated such interest over five years could be greatly helped by a reimbursement from the landlord . `` At the end of five years , for a senior citizen ( who paid a $ 500 security deposit ) , it 's $ 125 in interest , '' Councilman Joel Wachs said . `` That 's a lot of money for a senior citizen , $ 125 . '' Wachs estimated that , if a conservative security deposit of $ 500 is assumed for each of the 470,000 affected apartment units , tenants will accrue $ 58 million in interest from landlords by 1995 . However , city officials said the interest payments are likely to be higher . The council also voted 12 to 1 to prohibit eviction or rent increases when a household adds one dependent child . The law will cover multiple births such as triplets . With an eye to the city 's overcrowded conditions , the council also voted to protect tenants from eviction if they add one extra person , whether or not that person is a relative . Under the measure , the landlord will be allowed to raise the rent by 10 % , but not evict the tenants , as is currently permitted . Barbara Zeidman , director of the city 's Rent Stabilization Division , said the landlord must accept any reasonable additional tenant . However , if a proposed tenant has a history of bad credit , past evictions or other problems directly related to renting , a landlord will still be able to refuse . `` This recognizes that even with rent control , people are not able to pay rent and are having to bring in a roommate , '' said Larry Gross , director of the Coalition for Economic Survival .