Most maps can tell you where you are and which way to go ; gene maps can tell you which way you 'll probably die . The question is , do you really want to know ? For the price of a Rand McNally World Atlas , you will soon be able to learn what your body has in store for you . A few drops of blood , a whirl in a centrifuge and the right enzyme cocktail are the necessary ingredients to cut and paste your double helix into a detailed map of the body 's design . These maps reveal where the design may be ruinously flawed . Genetic cartographers already chart genes for potential parents worried about passing on such diseases as Tay-Sachs and sickle-cell anemia to their offspring . But what of individuals who have already inherited their genetic time bombs ? This is emerging as the new focus of this diagnostic technology . Gene markers can determine with near certainty whether an individual has inherited specific illnesses -- most notably , Huntington 's chorea , a particularly debilitating way to die -- decades before any symptoms appear . As scientists map the new world of the human genome , we 'll be hearing monthly announcements from researchers around the world trumpeting their latest discoveries of gene-linked disease -- for example , the recent discovery of the gene for cystic fibrosis . `` The people who are doing research are quite right to say that new markers will be identified , '' says Dr. Neil A. Holtzman , a professor of pediatrics and epidemiology at Johns Hopkins who has written extensively on genetic testing . `` These markers will give us tremendous new insights into the genetic makeup of disease . '' The potential list is both awesome and depressing . Colon cancers , lung cancers and breast cancers ? Almost certainly . Cardiovascular illness ? High probability . Mental illnesses such as manic depression and schizophrenia ? Quite likely . Alzheimer 's ? Possibly . These may well be diseases you will inherit no matter what you do . There are no preventive measures . Then again , says Holtzman , gene maps may chart probability , not destiny . The map may reveal a 40 % probability that you 'll get pancreatic cancer or an 80 % chance for cancer of the uterus . If you 're lucky , you 'll live longer . On the other hand , you may be able to escape your genetic susceptibility by managing your life style better : Stop smoking , eat more vegetables and the statistics that indicate your genetic propensity for a heart attack could drop to 3 in 10 from 8 in 10 . `` We will clearly know how to detect those genetic predispositions , '' says Holtzman , `` and this will worry some people to death . Unfortunately , we will have the ability to predict long before the ability to intervene . While physicians are accustomed to treating people with an overt disease , they really are n't prepared to sit down with someone and discuss probabilities . Physicians may have to be retooled to deal with this . '' But , given the chance , do people really want to know their odds ? In the case of Huntington 's chorea , fewer than half of the hundreds of people eligible for the test chose to take it . They did n't want to know . ( Similarly , most people in high-risk AIDS categories decline to be tested . ) The pain of ambiguity is easier to handle than the risk of certainty . `` The need for intense counseling is quite extreme , '' says Nancy S. Wexler , president of the Santa Monica-based Hereditary Disease Foundation . `` There 's this fantasy that a lot of these people have that knowing would resolve a lot of problems in their relationships . But even if Huntington 's goes away as an issue , they will still have their problems . '' Huntington 's chorea is an extreme case . But how would one 's life change given the knowledge of how you are most likely to die ? Will the proliferation of this new technology augur in a new era of fatalism ? How will this explosion of personal knowledge change our most intimate relationships ? Should a fiancee insist on seeing a gene map before signing the prenuptial agreement ? What happens to a marriage when the gene map says the husband has a 90 % chance of having a crippling stroke in the next five years ? Or that the wife will have a fatal leukemia ? Is getting a gene map of your 5-year-old the best thing to do ? What if the child 's map proves bleak ? When do you tell him ? Wexler tells of one Huntington 's couple that gave marker data to one child but not to another because `` they did n't think he could handle it . '' What if one tests positive ? Is every single twinge and ache interpreted as the onset of the crippling disease ? The ready availability of this technology may create a painful new self-consciousness about human frailty and mortality . On the other hand , millions of smokers blithely puff away with nary a care about the possible consequences . Maybe all this gene-linked data will be more numbing than enlightening , further desensitizing an already stressed-out population . But what 's most likely , I think , is a tremendous surge in the number of support groups such as Alcoholics Anonymous and the social network of AIDS volunteers , a flocking to religion and a dramatic rise in the counseling business . `` What you 're talking about is astronomical , '' says John Fletcher , an Episcopalian minister and bioethicist with the University of Virginia School of Medicine . `` What you 're going to see is a lot of entrepreneurial activity in new screening and counseling services . We 're not yet ready for the explosion that gene mapping is going to bring . ''