Black enrollment in the nation 's colleges and universities peaked in 1980 and continues to decline . But the rate of decline masks two other distressing trends : reductions not only in absolute numbers of black male students but also in the ratio of black men to black women on campus . Black women now outnumber black men by three to one on some campuses , one of them being Princeton . Left unchecked , the drift could have ominous economic and social consequences . Statistics from just two freshman classes pretty much tell the story , as related last month by the Office of Minority Concerns of the American Council of Education . Twenty years ago 63 black students entered Harvard as freshmen . Of those , 51 were men and 12 were women . Last September 138 black students were enrolled -- 48 men and 90 women . The total in 20 years more than doubled , but the number of black males declined . As an average of all American campuses , 60 % of black college students are women . Contrary to the national trend , black enrollment at UC Berkeley , UCLA and Stanford is rising , but the ratio of black women to black men on the UC campuses is about the same as the national average , and the men are losing ground . Black enrollment at the USC is down , with women representing 55 % of the total . The gap is even wider at several historically black colleges . Women outnumber men by 2 to 1 at Virginia 's Hampton Institute , and by 5 to 1 in last year 's freshman class at Georgia 's Clark College . Colleges aggressively recruited blacks in the 1960s , especially after the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibited federal funding for colleges that discriminated . Grant , work-study and tuition-loan programs enacted during the Johnson Administration put college within reach of more working-class and impoverished black students . A particularly important program was Upward Bound , a campus-based program to smooth the transition for black students from high school to college . The decline can be traced , at least in part , to changes in education priorities during the Reagan Administration . Financial aid did not keep pace with the soaring costs of college . The federal emphasis shifted from grants to loans . Work-study funds were cut by 22 % . College drifted back out of reach for many high-school graduates . The changes hit black students hardest because they were , and are , disproportionately poor . But other factors help account for the fall in the percentage of black males on campus . One factor is the growing number of black families that are headed by young , impoverished , semi-literate single women , poor role models for daughters and no model at all for sons . Nor do boys often find role models in elementary school . Stymied by stereotypes and lowered expectations , too many grow up expecting not much more from life than the immediate gratification of a minimum-wage job or a stint in the military and the allure of quick profits from crime . In that hard and narrow world , there are few routes to college . More black men could beat those odds if the opportunities for success were bolstered in the early grades before they dropped out of school and were lost forever . Businesses and governments should help them beat the odds by supporting after-school efforts , neighborhood tutoring and church programs . Local celebrities and professionals can and should get involved in programs that help reward academic progress . Black students who are capable of college work should have every opportunity to get on campus and stay there . At predominantly white campuses , college presidents must work harder to eliminate racial tensions . Jacqueline Fleming , author of the landmark study , `` Blacks in College , '' told the magazine Black Issues in Higher Education : `` There is a 50-50 chance that black students in college anywhere will encounter personally threatening difficulties , including physical threats as well as covert hostilities . '' There is an even greater chance that black students will be shut out of most leadership posts and extracurricular activities . The campus climate must become less hostile if black students are to persevere successfully . Twenty-five years after equal opportunity became more than a slogan , black Americans are the only group that is losing ground in higher education . If the decline continues , the disparities will widen and more black men will become unproductive burdens on the nation . If President Bush is to live up to his chosen sobriquet as the Education President , he will have to help provide real and broad opportunities for black students at American colleges .