All 79 opposition lawmakers resigned en masse Monday as the rival governments of South Korea and North Korea wrangled over a proposal to open their common border to free travel . Angry opposition lawmakers in the 299-member National Assembly demanded early elections to form a new Assembly and warned that President Roh Tae Woo is trying to use relations with North Korea to divert the public from worsening domestic problems . North Korea supported the resignations and urged a stepped-up struggle against the Roh government . Also Monday , the Roh government announced that it is willing to negotiate with Communist North Korea on conditions that the north is setting for opening the two countries ' common border to travelers . `` In order to open the border and realize grand national exchanges , we are ready to discuss any problems related to it , '' Unification Minister Hong Sung Chul said on national radio and television . In a dramatic speech Friday , Roh proposed that the common border be opened for five days in August on a trial basis , allowing people on both sides free travel . He also said open borders could lead to talks on unification . But North Korea sent letters Monday rejecting Seoul 's offer to open the border and instead proposed expanded high-level talks on Friday . North Korea 's official Korean Central News Agency , monitored in Tokyo , reported the proposal . The official North Korean party newspaper Rodong Shinmun said that South Korea 's offer to open its border for free travel `` is nothing but a trick . '' It was not immediately known if South Korea would agree to the expanded border talks . Seoul has rejected such talks in the past . In letters addressed to the South Korean government and opposition leaders , North Korea also demanded that South Korea scrap its anti-Communist national security laws , release prisoners jailed for promoting unification and allow South Korean dissidents to attend an Aug. 15 border rally sponsored by North Korea . The Korean border is one of the most heavily fortified in the world . More than 1.5 million troops are deployed on both sides . There is no mail , travel or other communication between the two sides . Kim Dae Jung , head of the opposition Party for Peace and Democracy , said his party welcomes efforts at opening the border but cautioned the government against using the issue for political gains . The ruling Democratic Liberal Party , which controls two-thirds of the Assembly 's seats , said the resignations will not be immediately accepted .