Twenty Orange County Senior Girl Scouts were presented the Gold Award , the highest honor in Girl Scouting , at a banquet at the Mesa Verde Country Club in Costa Mesa . They are Laura Kennedy , Cindy McIver and Marisa Patterson , Anaheim ; Samantha Brown , Colleen Flint , Tanya Hogancamp and Becky Travis , Fountain Valley ; Jana Henke , Garden Grove ; Lisa Jepsen , Marina Gerson and Jane Wey , Huntington Beach ; Gigi Kim , Irvine ; Jenni Moran , La Habra ; Joann Swartz , Mission Viejo ; Kelly Weber and Katherine Shull , Newport Beach ; Laura Castaneda , Kristena Heard and Teesha Carloss , Santa Ana , and Nora Jones , Westminster . The high school girls earned their awards through achievement in leadership , community service , skills development , career exploration and the completion of a service project of their own design . Huntington Beach resident Barbara Parks , president of Zeta Tau Alpha Chapter of Long Beach , was presented the Honor Ring , the highest award an alumna can receive , at the group 's recent convention in Tarpon Springs , Fla . The award was earned by service to the group locally and nationally and for community work . Saddleback College chemistry students Shirley Hernandez , Cherie Maddocks , Michael Miller , Gerald Shipps and Leo Sudnik each received $ 15,000 scholarships to continue their science studies . The funds were presented by the Science Scholarship Foundation in Orange County . Each of the scholarship winners plans to attend UC Irvine . Philanthropists Janice M. and Robert W. Johnson have been selected by the Volunteer Canter of Orange County to receive the 1990 Giving Is Living award for outstanding leadership in volunteerism . The Laguna Beach couple will receive the award at a black-tie dinner dance in November . An Excellence in Service to Children award has been presented to Dorothy Andrews of Mission Viejo for her efforts to enhance the health and welfare of children in Orange County . The award from the Orange County Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics was presented at a dinner meeting by chapter president Dr. Milton D. Schwarz Andrews was instrumental in forming the Children 's Hospital of Orange County 's Parent-to-Parent Infant Support Group in 1979 and was its first volunteer coordinator . The group helps families of ill newborn babies . In 1985 the group was the recipient of a $ 12,500 Disneyland Community Service Award and in 1988 was voted as the outstanding parent support organization in the nation at the National Parent Care Conference in Newport Beach . Denise R. Belmarez , a June graduate of Santa Ana High School who will attend UC Riverside and major in science and engineering , was awarded a $ 4,000 Home Savings of America Career Awareness Program scholarship . CAP is a 15-week transitional skills course that prepares high school seniors for entry into the working world . Denise served as secretary for both the biology and art clubs at school and earlier received a Padred Y Maestros Unidos achievement award . Grants totaling $ 9,000 have been awarded to the Laguna Art Museum by the National Endowment for the Arts in Washington in the collection maintenance and conservation categories . Some of the funds will be used to conserve three paintings in the museum by the late California artists William Keith , Marius Dahlgren and Karl Yens . The funds will also support upgrading of the museum 's storage of some 500 works on paper . Cypress-based PacificCare Health Systems received an award for its innovative ride-sharing program that has resulted in 238 of its 900 employees car-pooling or taking other types of alternative transportation . The award was presented by the Orange County Transportation Commission . Irvine resident Judy Marx , an international studies teacher at Woodbridge High School in Irvine , has been named winner of the $ 1,000 annual Global Teaching award from IHC Center , an independent international affairs and multicultural education center in Los Angeles .