County planners developing a land-use plan for Marina del Rey are hoping to get around a controversial requirement for a new road intended to siphon off some of the traffic in a heavily congested area . The road proposed by the county would be in the Oxford Triangle , just outside the county border in Los Angeles . But Councilwoman Ruth Galanter , who represents that area , opposes the plan . And Marina del Rey developers do not want future development tied to such a road , since Galanter 's opposition prompts them to think it will never be built . Dennis Slavin , a planner with the county Regional Planning Department , said the concept of having alternative routes to the proposed road is being considered . He said including language to that effect in the plan would allow county officials to discuss alternatives later with state Coastal Commission officials . Slavin added that specific alternatives to the road are now being proposed . Meeting Today The County Regional Planning Commission today is considering including such language in the plan , called the Local Implementation Program , at 9 a.m. in the Hall of Records , 320 W. Temple St . If approved by the commission , the plan will go to the Board of Supervisors for its approval . The Coastal Commission , which must also approve the plan , is expected to review the recommendations late this year , Slavin said . The Local Implementation Program is one of two parts of a coastal plan required by state law . The other part , called a Land-Use Plan , outlines general development concepts . The Local Implementation Program sets development standards to achieve these concepts . Motorists using Admiralty Way to avoid heavy congestion at the intersection of Washington Street and Lincoln Boulevard have created their own traffic problems on Admiralty . And it is this traffic that the road proposed by the county would relieve . As county officials try to move traffic from the Lincoln Boulevard terminus of the Marina Freeway to Washington Street , each end of that route requires coordination with Los Angeles city officials . Galanter , who represents the area , opposes the proposed bypass because it would pour additional traffic into residential Oxford Triangle . Residents there oppose such a road through their neighborhood . Robert Leslie , executive director of the Marina del Rey Lessees Assn. , said the additional language proposed for the Local Implementation Program does little for developers because all possible alternatives have been explored in the past without success . Leslie said he hopes the concept of tying development in Marina del Rey to a new bypass is dropped . `` We do n't like being held up because of this requirement , '' he said . `` There will have to be some kind of amendment . ''