Michael Chang arrived for the final of the Volvo/Los Angeles tennis tournament Sunday , three hours before his match against Stefan Edberg , surrounded by his usual entourage -- parents Joe and Betty and older brother Carl . Despite Michael 's tennis success , the Changs have remained a private family , shying away from interviews , revealing only bits and pieces of the family routine . Joe Chang , who works in the marketing division of Unocal , is on leave until September to travel with and coach his son . Betty , who quit her job as a research chemist two years ago , travels with Michael full time . An hour and a half before the championship match , which Chang eventually lost , 7-6 ( 7-4 ) , 2-6 , 7-6 ( 7-3 ) , Michael , Carl and Joe began the warmup ritual . Michael serves , Carl returns , Dad mills around the court observing Michael 's feet , his toss , his follow-through . The first 20 to 30 serves are either deep or fall at the net . But slowly , as Joe begins nodding , the serves find their target , the speed and accuracy return . Not a handful of words have been spoken by the time they leave , each prepared in his own way to face Edberg an hour later . The Changs take their tennis seriously . Even after Chang took a 5-2 lead in the first set , then allowed Edberg to tie the set and win the tiebreaker , 7-4 , the Changs sat straight-faced , rarely speaking even during breaks . In the second set , Chang led , 3-2 , when Edberg twisted his ankle . When play resumed , Chang quickly finished the set , prolonging his chances of winning a tournament in his hometown . Neither Chang nor Edberg were broken through the first 12 games of the final set , but Edberg had Chang on the defensive through the tiebreaker , and ended it , 7-3 , when Chang 's forehand fell into the net . `` I thought I played very well in the third set , '' Chang said . `` I just went out there and tried my best . It 's always nice to play a tournament in front of the home crowd who supports you and cheers for you . It kind of reminded me of the juniors . '' Said his father : `` Michael had chances but could n't close it . I think he played tentatively , but another year or two of experience will help that . '' Michael played doubles two weeks ago with his brother in Washington , and said that after Carl graduates in May , they might team on a regular basis . `` Maybe in another year or so , if I can keep up with him , '' the 1989 French Open champion joked .