When Angela Burnham graduated last June and took her talents to UCLA , Rio Mesa High track Coach Brian FitzGerald figured that another athlete of her caliber would not come along soon . After all , Burnham had won five state titles in her four years at Rio Mesa , including 100- and 200-meter titles in her junior and senior years . She had also run in the Olympic Trials and twice was honored as Track & Field News magazine 's female high school athlete of the year . No , Burnham was definitely a once-in-a-lifetime kind of talent for a high school coach . But a telephone call FitzGerald received only eight weeks later caused him to reevaluate his thinking . On the phone was Marion Jones , who informed FitzGerald that her daughter , also Marion , would be moving to Camarillo from Sherman Oaks to attend Rio Mesa in the fall . This was the same Marion Jones who had smashed Burnham 's national age-13 record in the 200 meters ( 24.90 seconds ) with a 24.30 clocking during the summer -- a time which would have placed second behind only Burnham in the Southern Section 3-A Division finals last season . This was the same Marion Jones who had run personal bests of 12.01 in the 100 and 56.98 at 400 meters as an eighth grader . `` I had read about her and I knew who she was , '' FitzGerald said . `` I said to myself , 'Boy , it would sure be great to have her , ' and the next thing I knew she was coming here . '' Comparisons with Burnham are likely to arise as the season progresses , but Jones , 14 , would prefer to focus on herself . `` ( The state meet ) is a long way off , '' she said . `` I just want to try my best and see what happens . Angela is a very fast runner and her records will be tough to beat . '' While the two are certain to be compared by their performances on the track , they are very different off it . `` Angela is Angela , and Marion is Marion , '' FitzGerald said . `` The only similarity is that they run very fast . Their personalities are complete opposites . Marion is a real aggressive and gregarious kid . Angela was very shy and quiet as a freshman . '' Burnham 's younger sister , Alycia , a junior at Rio Mesa who also competes on the track team , also notices a difference . `` Marion is real outgoing and likes to joke around , '' Alycia said . `` She 's real nice , but if she does n't like something , she 's not afraid to let people know . `` Angela is real quiet and likes to keep things to herself even when she 's happy or does well . '' Jones would have originally attended either Montclair Prep or Notre Dame , but a neighbor , whom Jones calls a `` a great track fan , '' suggested that she should attend Rio Mesa . `` People will talk about recruiting , '' FitzGerald said , `` but the fact is I think her mom was just shopping around to find the best place for her daughter to develop . I 'm not trying toot my own horn , but I think our results speak for themselves . '' Rio Mesa has has won seven league titles in the past eight years , tied for the state title in the girls ' division in 1988 and finished second last year . The outdoor season has yet to begin , but Jones put herself into the record books indoors at last month 's Sunkist Invitational at the Sports Arena . Running on the boards for the first time , Jones won the girls ' 50-yard dash ( 6.53 ) , ran the opening leg on the Spartans ' winning 640-yard relay team and anchored Rio Mesa 's winning mile relay team with a 57.7-second split . Her time in the 50 was the fastest ever by a ninth grader and ranks sixth on the all-time high school performance list . FitzGerald was especially impressed with Jones ' 440-yard leg in the mile relay . `` She 's a big girl to be running on such a small track . . . and has n't really been training for the quarter , '' FitzGerald said of Jones , who stands 5 foot 9 and weighs 130 pounds . In fact , Jones has n't had much time to train for track at all : She has been playing on Rio Mesa 's basketball team . Jones led the team in scoring ( 21.2 ) and rebounding ( 14.4 ) and helped Rio Mesa ( 9-15 ) win a Southern Section playoffs . `` She jumps so quickly and explosively it 's hard to describe , '' said Rio Mesa girls ' basketball Coach Al Walker of Jones , who is able to touch a 10-foot rim . `` She 's very confident and just dominates the defensive backboard and offensively at the post . She 's very competitive and aggressive . '' That competitiveness was apparent even during the first week of track practice in the fall . `` We were just doing some repeats up a hill with the cross-country team , '' Alycia said . `` Nothing fast , just trying to get into shape and on the first one , Marion took off and just starts to run full speed up the hill . We just said 'Marion , Marion , relax ! We have to do more . ' She just looked at Fitz and gave him the strangest look and said 'What ? Aw man . ' `` . But Jones speaks in a very serious tone when she discusses another sport she would like to play . `` I 'd like to give football a try , just on the high school level , not in college , '' Jones said . `` It 's been done before . Hueneme had one girl and Channel Islands had two girls that have played . `` I think I can play wide receiver , just like Jerry Rice ( of the San Francisco 49ers ) . I can catch the ball and I 'm fast enough to run with it. `` Worried about injury ? `` It 's just like any sport , '' Jones said . `` You do n't go looking to get hurt . It it does , it 's just an accident . It 's a risk you have to take . '' FitzGerald , apparently unaware of Jones ' ambitions , shook his head in disbelief to a reporter . `` She actually told you that ? '' he said . `` She 's really talented , but that idea is really kind of far-fetched . '' Yes , Marion is Marion and Angela is Angela . They both run fast . That 's where the similarity ends .