The arrival of federal agents on the floors of four New York commodity exchanges Thursday drew public attention once again to the risky and little-understood world of futures trading . The morning raids took place at the offices and trading pits on the eighth and ninth floors of a tower at the World Trade Center in lower Manhattan , where five New York exchanges trade futures on commodities ranging from oil to frozen orange juice . The exchanges involved in Thursday 's activity -- the New York Mercantile Exchange , the New York Commodity Exchange , the Coffee , Sugar and Cocoa Exchange , and the Cotton Exchange -- are among 12 such exchanges operating in the United States . They operate something akin to the better-known New York or American stock exchanges Instead of trading stocks , however , these financial markets deal with the trading of `` futures contracts '' for a variety of products , such as agricultural commodities , precious metals , foreign currencies and Treasury bonds . The contracts are bought and sold on sprawling floors by traders shouting orders in chaotic pits , which are monitored by officials from the individual exchanges and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission , the federal agency that regulates such activity . Although Chicago 's exchanges are the largest , New York 's exchanges are growing . The New York Mercantile Exchange has gained prominence with its crude oil , gasoline and heating oil contracts , and the Commodity Exchange is best known for its gold and silver trades . Futures trading brings together two highly divergent groups : hedgers , such as farmers , bankers and utilities , who want to protect the value of their commodities in changing markets , and speculators , who do n't hold the commodities but hope to turn a profit on the price swings . The futures contract is an agreement , usually between a speculator and hedger . The contract specifies how much of a commodity will be delivered , and at what price , on a specific date some weeks or months hence . Contracts cover a standard amount of a commodity , say 100 ounces of gold or 40,000 pounds of pork bellies ; the value can range from $ 10,000 to $ 1 million . But a participant need put down only a small percentage of a contract 's value , an amount called the margin , before settlement , in which the goods are exchanged between buyer and seller . Only about 3 % of the contracts actually are settled with an exchange of the commodity . A wheat grower , for example , who needs $ 4 a bushel to break even can protect himself against falling prices by getting into a futures contract that requires him to deliver 100,000 bushels of wheat at $ 4 each on a specified date to a speculator who buys the contract . Although the grower may have no intention of actually selling his wheat to the speculator , he has guaranteed himself a $ 4-a-bushel price . He may sell his wheat to the mill at market prices . But even if that price has fallen to $ 2 a bushel , the grower 's loss is offset by his gain on the futures contract . The speculator in this example , meanwhile , is betting on the price of wheat to increase . Say a wheat shortage causes the price to rise to $ 6 a bushel . In the end , the farmer still breaks even by receiving $ 4 a bushel and the speculator takes the $ 2 profit . Thus news of droughts , oil spills or other events that may affect future supplies of traded commodities can send futures prices careening wildly up and down from hour to hour . Though potential profits from such trading are impressive , the risks are quite high as well . Because of the way the futures markets work , a swing of just a penny in the price of a commodity could mean the loss of hundreds of thousands of dollars to the speculator . It has been estimated that as many as 90 % of individual investors who venture into the futures markets come out losers . The average investor `` should definitely stay away from them , '' said Peter Ritchken , an associate professor of finance at USC . `` They are taking a lot of risk . ''