Chris Jackson has never sought glory on the basketball court , only success . All he asks for is a winning season , maybe a conference championship . A playoff berth ? Sure , why not ? Success drove Jackson at Mater Dei High School and the lack of it drove him from UC Santa Barbara . This desire for winning led Jackson to UC Riverside , after playing one year at Rancho Santiago College -- where , of course , he had success . `` I do n't expect everything to turn our rosy all the time , I just want to win , '' Jackson said . `` It 's a terrible day when you lose . '' Jackson has found plenty of success since he came to Riverside in the fall of 1987 . The Highlanders were 22-8 last season and are 17-2 this year . The times have been good , and so has Jackson . Possibly Jackson 's greatest moment came on Christmas Day , which he thought was going to be one of those terrible days . Riverside had to face Iowa in the championship game of the Chaminade Christmas tournament in Hawaii . That 's right , Iowa , from the big time and Big Ten . Fourth-ranked Iowa . No one needed a caucus to predict the outcome of this one . `` They were joking around , smiling and laughing , during warmups , '' Jackson said . `` I do n't think they were taking us seriously . '' Well , the last laugh was on the Hawkeyes . Riverside , a Division II team from the California Collegiate Athletic Assn. , upset the Hawkeyes , 110-92 . The Highlanders set a National Collegiate Athletic Assn . record by making 21 of 36 three-point shots . Jackson , a 6-foot-4 senior , contributed 12 points while being guarded by Roy Marble , an All-Big Ten selection a year ago . It was n't exactly a scoring onslaught , but Jackson did hit some key baskets . At one point in the second half , the Hawkeyes were making a run . With the 45-second shot clock winding down , Jackson got the ball behind the three-point line -- the National Basketball Assn . three-point line -- and sank a shot to beat the clock . `` Marble looked at me and said , 'That was luck , ' `` Jackson said . `` The next time down , I went into the corner and made another three-pointer . Marble looked at me and shook his head . That still gets me pumped up . `` We were little Riverside before , now we 're big Riverside . '' Big or little , Jackson is at Riverside for just one reason -- success . And he has n't been disappointed , because the Highlanders are ranked No . 1 in the NCAA Division II poll . `` Honestly , I did n't think we had a chance at Chris , '' Riverside Coach John Masi said . `` I thought he was a little above our program . There were so many Division I schools interested in him . '' The trek that landed Jackson in Riverside began at the Long Beach Arena in March of 1980 . Jackson , an eighth-grader , was sitting in the rafters with his friend , Mike Fielder . They watched in awe as Inglewood defeated Long Beach Poly , 52-46 , for the Southern Section major division championship . `` We were watching Inglewood celebrating , '' Jackson said . `` Mike and I decided right then that some day we were going to be the ones on the court celebrating . '' But , in his dream , Jackson was n't wearing a Mater Dei jersey . At that time , the Monarchs had yet to win a Southern Section title and were considered just another good basketball school . When Ray Alvarado , Jackson 's traveling team coach , told him about Mater Dei , it did n't really mean much . He was already set on attending La Quinta with his friends . The matter might have died had not Alvarado told John Jackson , Chris ' father , about the Monarchs ' program . `` My parents had always wanted to send their kids to a private high school , '' said Jackson , the youngest of seven children . `` But they never had the means to do it until it was my turn to go to high school . My dad got it in his mind that Mater Dei was where I would go . '' Jackson was n't so sure . `` I had the vision that Catholic schools were strict , '' he said . `` You had to go to church all the time and there were a bunch of nuns running around with rulers . '' All through the summer , Jackson pleaded with his parents not to force him to attend Mater Dei . Finally , the night before school was to start , his parents relented and said he did n't have to if he did n't want to . `` By then , it was too late , I already had my clothes and books , '' Jackson said . `` I was going to Mater Dei . '' The Monarchs were moderately successful in Jackson 's sophomore season . They qualified for the Southern Section 4-A playoffs and reached the quarterfinals . The next season , Gary McKnight replaced Bill Alexander as coach . Mater Dei went on to win the first of its five Southern Section championships . Jackson was n't the star , but he was a key component -- a little scoring , a little rebounding , a little defense . `` I never wanted to be a star , I just wanted the team to win , '' he said . It did . In 1982-83 , the Monarchs defeated Long Beach Poly in the final , 62-44 , at the Long Beach Arena , where Jackson and Mater Dei teammate Fielder had sat in the rafters three years before . `` We were celebrating after the game and Mike and I looked and , at the same time , we said , 'remember , ' `` Jackson said . The Monarchs finished 29-3 in 1983-84 , but lost in the championship game to Long Beach Poly . By this time , college recruiters were making regular visits to Mater Dei , as they coveted the likes of Tom Lewis ( 6-7 ) , Matt Beeuwsaert ( 6-6 ) and Mike Mitchell ( 6-5 ) , as well as Jackson and Fielder ( 6-4 ) . All would receive scholarships to Division I schools . `` I think my senior year was the first time I really took basketball seriously , '' Jackson said . `` I not only wanted a scholarship , I wanted to go to a Division-I school . '' Jackson accepted an offer from Jerry Pimm , the first-year coach at UC Santa Barbara . At first , Jackson was happy with his choice . Pimm was grooming Jackson to be the team 's point guard . He even started a few games for the Gauchos . Everything was just how Jackson planned , except one thing -- winning . `` I think I was a little spoiled at Mater Dei , '' Jackson said . `` I went from losing five games in two years to losing five games in two weeks . '' By the end of the season , Jackson was at an all-time low . He was n't playing much , the team was n't winning and basketball stopped being fun . Pimm met with Jackson over the summer and told him he was welcome to stay , but not obligated . `` I told him that in the end , Chris Jackson was the only person he had to satisfy , '' Pimm said . `` If he stuck it out , he might have the success he was looking for . But I told him he should make a decision with himself in mind . '' Jackson decided to leave and transferred to Rancho Santiago . He sat out his first year and got as far away from the basketball court as he could . `` When a kid takes a year off like that , you never really know if he 's going to come back , '' Rancho Santiago Coach Dana Pagett said . `` Chris just said he needed the time to himself . We never had any meeting , although I made it a point to bump into him once in a while . '' The Dons won the Orange Empire Conference and reached the semifinals of the state playoffs . Once again , recruiters came calling , but this time Jackson was ready . He made visits to TCU , Boise State , the University of San Diego and the University of the Pacific . `` I was sitting in Coach Pagett 's office one day , talking about all the schools I had visited , '' Jackson said . `` I did n't really want to go to any of them . He asked what was wrong with those programs . Finally he said , 'You 're just been spoiled by winning . ' I realized he was right and that ruled out all those schools . Division II was the only other option . '' Jackson was the starting point guard for Riverside last season , averaging 9.8 points , 4.9 rebounds and 3.8 assists per game . The Highlanders finished 22-8 and shared the CCAA title with Cal State Bakersfield . This season , his numbers have improved , but not dramatically ( 10 points , 5 rebounds and 5 assists per game ) . But it 's enough that the Highlanders are successful on the court . Anything else is just a bonus .