The federal government has expanded its recommendation for a prudent diet to all Americans -- not just those at risk for heart disease -- which means that more and more people must learn to make sensible changes in their diets in order to ensure better health . But most adult Americans admit that they are already confused on this issue . At least 95 % of those interviewed for a recent Gallup Poll said that while they believe balance , variety and moderation are keys to healthy eating , up to 45 % say they are eliminating red meat from their diets and 36 % are cutting out dairy foods to achieve this goal . Despite calls from health experts and agencies that fat in the diet be limited to 30 % of all calories consumed for the day , with saturated fat intake restricted to just 10 % -- Americans are still consuming far too much fat for their own good . Fat consumption in this country still lingers around 36 % , experts report . Most Americans have improved their knowledge of nutrition , said Nancy S. Wellman , president of the American Dietetic Assn. , but they still make unrealistic and harmful food choices . She noted that 52 % reported increasing their consumption of oat bran , and 48 % said they were taking more vitamin supplements . More than two-thirds of the Americans queried in the national survey , commissioned by the ADA and the International Food Information Council , said that they select foods based on their perceptions of items as `` good '' or `` bad '' because of fat and other feared elements -- despite advice to the contrary from health and nutrition experts . What this demonstrates , said Wellman , is that `` Americans are surprisingly knowledgeable about nutrition and health , but when it comes to translating facts into food choices , most still opt for quick fixes and the latest health fads . '' But it is possible to adhere to the 30 % fat recommendation . Whether following the scientific approach -- calculating fat grams and calories , or by taking some simple steps toward behavior modification . `` If you follow simple guidelines , '' said Jackie Saracino , president of the California Dietetic Assn. , `` you 'll be getting good nutrition and it will assist in lowering the amount of fat you consume . '' Following the basic four food groups is the best place to start , she said . Choose meats that are lean such as poultry without skin , fish and lean cuts of beef , pork and veal . And , in the milk group , purchase low-fat or nonfat milk products , such as milk , cottage cheese or yogurt . Replace ice cream with sorbet or sherbet , which is lower in fat . Select cheese that is made with nonfat or part-skim milk . `` You have to read lables , '' Saracino said , `` Do n't just buy ( a product ) because of the health claim but read and analyze ( the product to ) see what it 's made with . The label should say whether it 's made with low-fat or skim milk . '' Saracino recommends that consumers try to choose whole grain products such as wheat , oats , corn . And be sure to include fresh vegetables and fruits each day . Other suggestions include avoid adding fat to prepared foods or when cooking . Bake , broil and grill whenever possible and take advantage of the microwave , another low-fat cooking method , Saracino said . These changes are practical and leave room in the diet for favorite foods , on occasion , as `` a special treat . '' `` It is a very easy way to obtain the goal of a healthy diet , '' she explained . For those who prefer the more scientific approach , it is possible to figure out the amount of fat in the daily diet . But you 'll need to know the total fat content , in grams , of the foods you eat . This information is usually available on the product label . Or , a pamphlet , `` Nutritive Value of Foods Home and Garden Bulletin 72 '' is available by mail from the Government Printing Office Bookstore , 505 S. Flower St. , Level C , Los Angeles , 90071 . Here 's how to assess a day 's diet : On a balanced diet , the day 's intake should be made up from foods from a variety of sources , with distributions of 55 % carbohydrate , 15 % protein and 30 % fat as optimal . In order to determine how close you are to the goal for fat convert the grams of fat supplied by a food into fat calories . But product labels typically do n't provide fat information in terms of fat calories . Instead , product packages give the amount of fat in grams . An average croissant , for example , contains 235 calories and 12 grams of fat . Fat is higher calorie-wise than any other element in the diet . Carbohydrates and protein , for example , each offer four calories for every gram consumed , whereas , every gram of fat is equivalent to nine calories . Multiply the grams of fat by nine and the croissant derives almost half of its calories from fat . The process for evaluating an entire day is similar . First , determine desired calorie intake from the Recommended Dietary Allowances , or total how many calories you eat each day -- making sure to include every morsel you eat including snacks and tastes of foods . On a 1,500 calorie-per-day diet , for example , based on the 30 % fat allotment , you are allowed 450 calories from fat . Then , when you divide 450 by nine ( the number of calories in each gram ) you may eat up to 50 grams of fat for the day and still fall within the 30 % fat range . Assessing the diet based on the entire day is preferred to evaluating the amount of fat calories in individual foods because some items , a cheeseburger for instance , may be well above the 50 % fat range -- individually -- but it still fits into a sensible diet when balanced with low fat foods the remainder of the day . To help with either process , here are some guidelines for daily food choices , which were adapted by ADA from a USDA handbook . -- Breads , cereals and other whole grain and enriched products -- choose six to 11 servings each day from among the following : one slice bread ; one-half hamburger bun or English muffin ; three to four small or two large crackers ; one-half cup cooked cereal , pasta or rice ; or one ounce ready-to-eat cereal . -- Fruits -- choose two to four servings each day from among the following : three-quarters cup juice ; one medium fresh fruit ; or one-half cup fresh or canned fruit . -- Vegetables -- choose three to five servings each day from among the following : one-half cup cooked or chopped raw vegetables or one cup leafy raw vegetables . -- Meat , poultry , fish and alternates -- choose two to three servings each day from among the following : a total of five to seven ounces cooked lean meat , poultry , fish or other protein source ; one ounce alternative protein source such as one egg ; one-half cup cooked beans ; or two tablespoons peanut butter . -- Milk , cheese and yogurt -- men choose two to three servings ; women , three to four servings ; children , two or more servings ; teens and pregnant or breast feeding women , four servings : one cup milk ; one cup buttermilk , one cup yogurt , 1 1/2 ounces natural cheese ; or two ounces process cheese . -- Fats , sweets and alcohol -- limit intake .