Wedbush Corp. , which recently disclosed that it had reduced its holdings in Great American Bank , has sold off still more of its stock in the troubled savings and loan . According to a filing with the federal government , Wedbush sold 263,600 Great American shares between April 16 and April 20 for $ 914,000 , an average net sale price of $ 3.47 per share . Moreover , sources close to the S & L say Wedbush has sold an additional but unspecified number of Great American shares since April 20 . Combined with a previous sale of 416,000 Great American shares disclosed this week , the sale left Wedbush with control of 3,394,323 Great American shares , or 14.2 % of the total outstanding . That is down nearly 680,000 shares from the 4,074,023-share , 17 % holding it owned a year ago at this time . Wedbush is still Great American 's single largest shareholder . Wedbush Chairman Ed Wedbush , who is also a member of Great American 's board of directors , was unavailable to comment on the reasons for the stock sales . Great American stock closed unchanged at $ 3 a share in light New York Stock Exchange trading Wednesday . Insider stock sales , or those by corporate officers and directors such as Wedbush , are generally a negative sign for a stock . Word of the sale comes at a time when capital-deficient Great American is trying to avoid government seizure by raising outside capital or by selling itself in part or whole to outside financial interests . There was speculation that Wedbush 's stock sale could be prompted by a `` margin call , '' an event prompted when a brokerage or lender demands payment from an investor for shares acquired with borrowed money . Margin calls are sometimes triggered by a steep decline in a stock 's price and Great American 's stock , which closed Wednesday at $ 3 , has traded as high as $ 14.875 over the past year . Wedbush 's filing details the heavy losses that it has taken on its Great American investment . According to the documents , Wedbush paid $ 41.2 million or an average $ 12.22 per share for the Great American shares it still holds . That investment is now worth $ 10.1 million , meaning Wedbush 's paper loss on its remaining Great American stock is $ 31.1 million . Regulators have given Great American until Dec. 31 to raise additional capital , drastically shrink assets or find a buyer . A handful of outside investors and banks , including Security Pacific Bank , Bank of America and the Robert M. Bass Group , owners of American Savings , are known to be interested in Great American , which has 211 branches and $ 15.9 billion in assets . However , the threat of a government seizure remains real , particularly if Great American reports a large enough first-quarter loss to further weaken its tenuous capital base . As of Dec. 31 , Great American 's tangible capital was down to $ 85.9 million , roughly one-third the amount that regulators like to see in an S & L its size .