Mavis Staples , famous as part of the gospel-cum-secular soul group the Staple Singers , had met and sung with Prince on a number of occasions . But she was wholly unprepared last year when her father , Pops Staples , called and told her that the Purple Batguy 's manager was trying to track her down to offer her a solo contract with his Paisley Park Records . `` When they said that Prince wanted to write for me and have me join his label , I was flattered , but I did ask the manager , 'Now , what type of song would Prince be writing for me ? ' It was n't because of any dirty lyrics or anything , it was because of what I had heard Vanity and Apollonia singing . Those to me were teeny-bopper songs . I said , ' I 'm a grown woman , what would he write for me ? ' `` She was duly assured that The Kid ( a Prince alias ) would write some tunes suitable for a woman of experience and substance , and that was that . `` I was real cool on the telephone , but I got off the phone and I jumped up and down and ran around , I felt so happy , '' said a laughing , effusive Staples . `` It 's been joy and I 've been grinnin ' ever since . '' Prince produced the new album , `` Time Waits for No One '' ( Mavis ' first solo effort since 1976 ) , in Minneapolis in association with Stax veterans Al Bell , Homer Banks and Lester Snell in Tennessee . `` It gave us a funky Memphis-and-Minnesota sound , so I started calling it MAM , '' said Staples , a Chicago resident . The odd coupling of Mavis and Prince did shock some who recall the Staple Singers ' roots as a gospel group , she acknowledged . `` People have asked me , 'How do you feel about him putting God 's name with sex ? ' But I think 'Love-sexy ' is one of the most beautiful albums that Prince has written . He sent it to me , and I sat down and read the lyrics . It 's true that he has the Lord 's name in there with sex , but when the deal goes down , when it 's all said and done , it 's all beauty . This is the way I analyze it . '' CHRIS WILLMAN