Richard Nixon advising George Bush on handling the media is like Quasimodo giving advice on grooming and personal hygiene . Or Dracula promoting a balanced diet . It 's been said by his enemies that the only way to get rid of Nixon is to drive a stake through his heart . Perhaps , for the former President continues somehow to flourish as a post-Watergate author/elder statesman . And here he is in this week 's TV Guide , now playing the unlikely role of media consultant under the headline `` Memo to President Bush : How to Use TV -- and Keep from Being Abused By It . '' Now that is quaint and amusing , for if ever a politician continually sank his fangs into and exchanged jugular bites with the media , it was Nixon , who not only failed to woo or understand them , but frequently antagonized and blamed them for his problems and failures . Having learned at least one lesson from his own experience , Nixon does not urge Bush to hunch his shoulders , thrust his arms above his head and make `` V '' signs with his fingers . At once the most valid and redundant advice that Bush gets from Nixon is not to expect to match Ronald Reagan 's success on television . Yes , of course . But surely , as he approaches Friday 's inauguration , Bush already knows that he is no Reagan in front of the camera . He knows that he tends to whine , that he lacks presence , that his own tendency to misspeak on TV will not be as easily forgiven , that he will never persuade anyone to win one strictly for the Busher . When it comes to TV Presidents , there may never be another Reagan , who , for reasons that remain undefined , was able to blur the separation of messenger and message almost as soon as the red light clicked on . It mattered not whether he was flawlessly delivering a prepared speech or badly floundering and speaking Gipperish at a press conference . Reagan was Reagan . He , not what he was saying , was the communication . And he whizzed through it all -- almost unscathed . How Nixon must envy Reagan for that , for if anything screams out from the New Nixon 's 2,000-word article in TV Guide , it 's the Old Nixon 's bitterness and paranoia about the media . `` They have to be outfoxed , outflanked and outperformed , '' he writes . `` Unless the President finds a way to use them to pursue his own agenda , they will use his failures to pursue theirs . '' The same words would apply to terrorists . Curiously , Nixon credits most TV reporters with being `` conscientious , intelligent and hard-working , '' then proceeds to vilify them as a sort of faceless monolith . As you read his words and your brain replays TV pictures of a self-pitying Nixon assuring reporters that they wo n't have him `` to kick around anymore '' after failing to win the 1962 California gubernatorial race , it becomes clear that he is less interested now in advising Bush than in settling some very old scores . Some of his points : -- `` Of all the institutions arrayed with and against the President , none controls his fate more than television . '' So TV will determine the destiny of George Bush , more even than Congress or the White House itself ? Come now . Surely the media -- and especially TV -- are vital to any Administration , and the electronic age requires Presidents who have at least the basic skills to communicate to the nation through TV . Moreover , TV 's handling of stories obviously does have an effect on public opinion . But are Presidents 99-pound weaklings or something ? On the contrary , it 's logical to conclude that the fate of Bush is chiefly in the hands of Bush , not TV -- just as Nixon , not TV , deserves blame for Watergate as well as credit for a policy toward China that many feel was visionary . -- `` Televised press conferences should be held monthly at most . . . .The media have been clamoring for more news conferences , and it is certainly in their interests for the President to acquiesce . . . . But a news conference is only in the President 's interest when it achieves some purpose other than satisfying the media 's insatiable thirst for confrontation . Contrary to the media 's fulminations , the public does not much care how often the President has a press conference . '' This is an argument for less access -- if not outright secrecy . More televised press conferences are merely in the media 's interest ? The media are interested only in confrontation ? The public does n't care ? Granted , televised press conferences are flawed , sometimes yield little information and too often lead to showboating -- by the President and reporters . They are , however , extremely valuable as a rare , direct link to power . What 's more , they set the President adrift in a relatively uncontrolled environment and allow Americans to see for themselves if he is physically and mentally fit or is foaming at the mouth . Finally , here is one more piece of advice for Bush from another source : Ignore Dick 's tricks of the trade and set your own course , knowing that although the media are n't perfect , they 're the only media we have . And one more thing : Neither overestimate nor underestimate the power of pictures , and thank your lucky stars that it was n't you the cameras caught riding around in a tank .