Opening Day is not a good day to be an employer . Such annual afflictions as 24-hour plague , long-gone flu and elective brain surgery are laying up more employees today than on all the rest of the days of the year combined . Opening Day is not a good day to be a teacher . The behavior of students on this day is only slightly less sociopathic than that of rioting inmates -- or Christmas shoppers . Opening Day is , however , a great day to be a baseball fan . Because on this lone day , all things are possible : The Boston Red Sox will finally go all the way . The Chicago Cubs will finally go all the way . The Pittsburgh Pirates will win the division by 50 games . The New York Yankees will have only one manager . ( Another good thing about Opening Day : you 're allowed to get carried away . ) Yes , Opening Day is always bright with promise . Yes , it is as personal an American celebration as Thanksgiving or the Fourth of July . It signals a subtle shift in the rhythm of our everyday lives . But it is more , much more . Opening Day is Presidents : William Howard Taft began the presidential custom of throwing out the first ball in 1910 . Franklin D. Roosevelt did it eight times ; Dwight D. Eisenhower , a former West Point outfielder , got the nod on seven occasions . Harry S. Truman had the best arm , make that arms . Truman was ambidextrous , and in the 1950 opener he tossed out the first ball left-handed , then came back with a right-handed delivery . In comparison , Lyndon B. Johnson did n't have much of an arm , but had a major league appetite and woofed four hot dogs after his fling . Opening Day is great players : Ted Williams hitting .449 in 14 openers . Darryl Strawberry crushing one against the Montreal Expos in Olympic Stadium last year that was still going when it hit the 160-foot high cement ring surrounding the roof . Bob Feller throwing a no-hitter against the Chicago White Sox in 1940 . Babe Ruth winning his first three starts as an Opening-Day pitcher for the Red Sox , and going on to hit .422 in 18 openers . Roger Maris clubbing two homers on his first Opening Day as a Yankee in 1960 . Don Drysdale becoming the only pitcher with two home runs on Opening Day . Opening Day is the ballpark : The smell of fresh-cut grass . Hot dogs . New uniforms . Flapping flags . Faded caps atop graying heads . Kids with mitts tied to their belts . Opening Day is forever : No matter what they do to the game : the DH , the shag carpeting , the dome homes ; no matter how boorish the players become : the sleaze , the drugs , the greed ; baseball survives , even thrives . Opening Day is a big chill : '' Play ball . ''