Sightseers , gamblers and news media invaded the Taj Mahal casino Monday on the first day Donald Trump 's billion dollar gambling extravaganza opened its doors to the public . But gamblers could bet only with play money while state gaming authorities assess the operations . Approval for real gambling is expected by Wednesday or Thursday , when Trump officially opens the Taj at a ribbon-cutting ceremony . The casino is the size of two football fields and the decor could be described as gaudy , glittery , ostentatious , tasteless or just plain mind-boggling . It is filled with tons of white marble imported from Italy , 24 Austrian chandeliers , each with 5,000 pieces of cut crystal , nine huge stone elephants sprinkled with sparkling marble dust and 70 multicolored minarets and onion-shaped domes on the outer walls . Trump told visitors the casino was the biggest and best gambling den in the world and would flourish as soon as it gets its license . The Taj Mahal is Atlantic City 's 12th gaming hall and Trump 's third in the city . `` In the long term , the Taj will be good for Atlantic City , '' Trump said . `` In the short run , it will bring a lot of people here who have n't visited Atlantic City for years . But in the intermediate term , for some of the casinos , it 's going to be competitive . '' The casino is 120,000 square feet and contains 3,000 slot machines and 160 gaming tables . The entire property covers 17 acres next to the famous Atlantic City boardwalk . It has 1,250 rooms , including a lavish penthouse suite that rents for $ 10,000 per night . The complex employs 6,500 people , many of whom are required to dress in the sort of costumes one might have found in the real Taj Mahal some 300 years ago . `` It 's certainly lavish , '' said Charles Filo of Woodbridge , N.J. , a retired truck dispatcher who comes to Atlantic City two or three times a week to play at the crap tables . `` I 'll give it a try when I can get some real action and if I like it , I 'll come back . '' The real bottom line for the Taj , which needs a daily casino win of $ 1.3 million to break even , is how many Charlie Filos can be attracted from the other casinos . `` There 's a risk here , it is just not clear which casinos are at risk , '' said Thomas Carver , president of the New Jersey Casino Assn. , a trade group . The highest grossing Casino in Atlantic City last year was Trump Plaza , with a daily casino win of $ 838,000 . A stock market analyst who follows the casino industry was fired recently after Trump complained that the analyst 's stock reports were overly critical of the new casino . Philadelphia-based Janney Montgomery Scott Inc. fired gaming industry analyst Marvin Roffman . The company said Roffman had been dismissed for twice violating Janney Montgomery policy and withdrawing a written apology to Trump he had signed . Another hurdle facing the Taj and the rest of the industry is the downturn in casino revenues . In the first two months of 1990 , revenues fell to $ 420.1 million compared with $ 422.3 million in the first two months of 1989 . `` If the Taj is the main attraction in Atlantic City , it should be able to break even , at worst . The wild card is that Atlantic City showed weakness in revenue growth , '' said Richard Reubenstone , a junk bond analyst .