Ernie Torres worried about his neighbors ' reaction to a large , wooden peace symbol he hung in front of his Northridge home last month as a Christmas decoration . He remembered the adverse response to a peace symbol he displayed in front of a Canoga Park house during the height of the Vietnam War . In those politically charged days , the peace symbol meant `` you were member of the anti-war minority , a Commie , '' Torres said . `` When I look back , I 'm surprised nobody burned down the house . It was a very conservative neighborhood , '' he added . But that was then and this is now , Torres reasoned . And even though times had changed , hanging a large peace symbol could spark controversy . `` I asked myself , 'Do you want to bring that age back ? ' Those were n't the best of times , '' he said . But Torres , 46 , hung the peace sign , complete with lights to illuminate it at night . To his surprise , the response has been positive and his peace symbol , still in Torres ' front yard , has served as the catalyst to some rather surprising events . When one of Torres ' sons , an Army private stationed at Ft. Benning , Ga. , saw the huge peace symbol , he wanted his picture taken next to it . His mother , Karen Torres , eagerly shows visitors the photograph of her son in his dress uniform standing next to the peace symbol , his arms stretched above his head and his fingers making the `` V '' peace salute . 'They Knew What it Was ' One evening when the Torres family forgot to light the symbol , a trio of high school girls , who said they were worried that the family had taken it down , appeared at the door . `` They knew what it was and said they loved it , '' Karen Torres recalled . `` They said that there were peace symbol earrings , and peace symbol T-shirts . It seems like there 's a revival of the peace symbol . It 's neat . '' The Torres ' peace symbol even has had a calming affect on a cluster of dorms at Cal State Northridge across the street from the family 's house . `` I do n't know what it is , but since that thing went up , everyone here seems to have mellowed out , '' said David Flinn , a resident of the North Campus complex . `` Maybe it was the Christmas vacation , maybe it was the holiday spirit . But the peace symbol is still up and the mellowness is still here . '' The only controversy generated by the Torres ' peace symbol is a ongoing family debate over whether to leave it up or take it down . Daughter Jill , 17 , and her high school friends want it to be a permanent front yard fixture . `` They think it 's cool , '' she said . Whatever the final outcome , Torres said he is going to take his time making up his mind . `` It went over so big , if we take it down , we 're going to get a lot of protest , '' he said with a laugh .