Konrad Lorenz , the Austrian scientist who won a Nobel Prize for his pioneering studies of human and animal behavior that led to theories of man 's innate aggressiveness , has died at age 85 . The Austrian Academy of Sciences said Tuesday that Lorenz died Monday night at his home at Altenburg , about 30 miles northeast of Vienna . The Austria Press Agency said he died of kidney failure . Lorenz , considered Austria 's most famous scientist , years ago could be found paddling in his swimming trunks among a flock of greylag geese , his favorite research objects . `` If you want to understand geese , you have to live with them , '' he would explain . He used to say the research into animal behavior that won him the Nobel Prize for medicine or physiology in 1973 started when he was 5 , as he quacked his way to a relationship with a duck he had raised . `` It was this contact which created the soil on which all my work has grown , '' said the white-haired , bearded bird lover , who gained a reputation for unconventional research methods and who held doctorates in medicine , zoology and psychology . Lorenz turned to research in animal behavior shortly after obtaining his medical degree . He had become an animal lover as a child , collecting a variety of pets at his expansive boyhood home outside Vienna . Up to 200 jackdaws , hawks , ravens , cormorants , storks and other wild birds also frequented the home where Lorenz returned in his old age . His first important findings concerned the social life of birds . Those studies convinced him that many aspects of bird behavior were innate and instinctive , rather than learned . His views were controversial , and they became even more so when he suggested that such instinctive behavior might be important in humans , too . One of his best-known findings was that young animals will become strongly attached to their biological mothers , a process known as imprinting . He showed that the process could be altered , however , by demonstrating that mallard ducklings would happily follow a human who greeted them shortly after birth and imitated a mother 's quacking . Lorenz 's theory of comparative ethology -- the study of animal and human behavior through comparative zoological methods -- linked him to the ideas of Charles Darwin . Like Darwin , he held that physical characteristics of species and hereditary behavior stem from trying to adjust to their surroundings to boost chances of the species ' survival . Born in Vienna , the son of a surgeon , Lorenz was awarded his first doctorate in medicine at age 25 . Further studies in zoology and psychology followed in Vienna and New York , culminating in a 1933 doctorate based on his research on the behavior of birds . In 1939 , Lorenz was given a chair in psychology at the prestigious Immanuel Kant University in Koenigsberg , then a German town and today the Soviet port of Kaliningrad . His tenure there and publications during that time led in later years to allegations that Lorenz was a Nazi sympathizer . When accepting the Nobel Prize , which he shared with Karl von Frisch and Nikolaas Tinbergen , he apologized for a 1940 publication judged to reflect Nazi views of science , saying that `` many highly decent scientists hoped , like I did , for a short time for good from National Socialism , and many quickly turned away from it with the same horror as I . ''