Half the budget must have gone for grease . Seven years after Francis Ford Coppola 's movie `` The Outsiders '' comes his Fox television series `` The Outsiders , '' premiering at 9:30 p.m. Sunday , thereafter to air at 7 p.m. ( Channels 11 and 6 ) . Like the movie , the series is based on the S.E . Hinton novel about some troubled young guys in the 1960s and takes place in a small Oklahoma town where the blue-collar greasers and rich-kid socs ( pronounced soshes ) are in eternal conflict . The noblest of the greasers are the orphaned Curtis brothers , who face one crisis after another in trying to remain together and out of the clutches of the welfare agency . Oldest brother Darrell ( Boyd Kestner ) is the moralizing head of the household and main breadwinner . Younger brother Ponyboy ( Jay R. Ferguson ) is the novel-reading literary light . And middle brother Sodapop ( Rodney Harvey ) is a somewhat unpromising work in progress . Meanwhile , Darrell 's oldest friend , love-making , law-breaking , head-cracking Tim Shepherd ( Robert Rusler ) is also his biggest headache in addition to being the greasers ' point man for fistfights , staredowns and various other clashes with the socs . Of which there are no more than , oh , half a dozen an episode . The heart of `` The Outsiders '' is class conflict -- just about everything is defined in those terms -- with the have-nots resenting being exploited and patronized by the haves . As a rule , the greasers take the high road on `` The Outsiders '' ( Tim excepted ) and the socs -- who are a bunch of spoiled snots -- the low road . Although the characters are too inconsistent to be entirely believable and often act too inanely to be respected , there are enough nice moments here to lift `` The Outsiders '' above the ordinary and give it promise . Yet `` The Outsiders '' depicts a pretty dismal world , giving us corrupt , sadistic cops and rotten rich who spend their waking hours plotting how to oppress the poor and dirty-fingernailed . What 's more , even the show 's young target audience may ultimately tire of week after week of greasers and socs sneering and snarling at each other . HOWARD ROSENBERG