For many tourists who come for the fishing , mountain bike trails and High Sierra scenery , summer in Mammoth has an idyllic appeal that lasts until the first snow brings skiers speeding up the highway from Southern California . But the resort and its 4,000 year-round residents have been confronted this summer with evidence that Mammoth Lakes , the first incorporated town in mountainous Mono County , is no longer an escape from the pressures that complicate life in American cities . Times Change So far this summer , local headlines have screamed about a drug ring that kidnaped and tried to murder a police source . Trees and meadows will soon give way to three new large developments , including the eastern Sierra 's first urban redevelopment project . And , less than five years since it was formed , the Town Council faces a recall led by disgruntled businessmen and the former mayor . All might be common occurrences in other California towns and cities , but in Mammoth Lakes they are signs of new times and , to some , a new order . Once a small community of motels and steak houses at the foot of a promising ski mountain , the Mammoth Ski Area has burgeoned into one of America 's largest and the town has grown with it . A real estate boom , the first since a volcano threat in 1983 that spurred a local recession , is bringing more year-round residents , pushing Mammoth further over the edge from resort to modern American town . The community calendar still includes regular meetings of High Sierra Fly Fishers and volunteer firefighters . But there are also weekly sessions of Alcoholics Anonymous , Adult Children of Alcoholics and Narcotics Anonymous . A rape crisis center is scheduled to open soon . `` You could n't find a married couple with kids when I moved up here , '' said Wally Hoffman , publisher and editor of the Mammoth Times , the more colorful of two weekly newspapers in town . Now the schools are filling up . The most telling sign is not the crime wave , which by urban standards was small and short-lived . Mammoth Lakes police cracked a drug ring and arrested 23 people , including three women charged with trying to beat to death another woman they suspected of working with police . More explanatory of the upheaval in Mammoth is the effort to recall the Town Council . Officially , recall leaders complain that the town pays its help too much and does n't listen to the people . But many people here agree a changing of the guard is behind the dispute . Became More Sophisticated '' There was a good ol ' boy mentality that has been here forever , '' said John Eastman , a Town Council member . `` The community demanded a higher level of sophistication . '' The turning point was a move this spring by the Town Council and an aggressive new town manager , Paul Marangella , to stop giving a portion of the 9 % tax on condo and motel rentals to a group of local business people . The group is supposed to use the money to promote Mammoth in Southern California . Around town some feel the group , the Mammoth Lakes Resort Assn. , has done its job well . `` The MLRA was designed to bring visitors here , '' former Mayor Boyd Lemmon says . `` We are getting substantially more summer business . '' But others are leery . Three years ago an association executive embezzled more than $ 100,000 and was sent to state prison . There is no hint of theft now , but the Town Council decided there must be a better way to lure tourists than letting the resort association spend more than $ 600,000 a year of town taxes on advertising and promotion . `` We ca n't continue to be unsophisticated , '' said Town Councilman Kirk Stapp , a high school government teacher . `` We 're in competition with Colorado and other areas . '' Led by Marangella , town officials also questioned the group 's practices , which include using some of the tax money to finance a telephone service that refers skiers to selected motels and condos . The Last Straw The resort association challenge was the last straw for business people who dislike the changes in Mammoth Town Hall . `` They want to control that money , '' said Tom Cage , owner of Village Sports Center and a recall leader . `` We incorporated this town for the people , not for bigger government . '' Some animosity stems from the council 's hiring last fall of Marangella , the stocky , intense town manager . He has angered Mammoth old-timers in a variety of ways , from calling for an end to the town 's policy of free child care and proposing a fee for tennis court reservations , to getting free snow boots as part of his contract . `` You ca n't imagine how disruptive he has been in this community . It 's unbelievable , '' said Lemmon , who was mayor until he resigned from the council in 1986 . Marangella 's most controversial step may have been a written report that alleged the Mono County Grand Jury might investigate threats of retaliation by disgruntled resort association members . `` The message -- perhaps unintended -- was 'if you mess with us , we will break you politically , ' `` Marangella said in the report . But Marangella has also brought a professional edge to the town offices , a side that was sorely lacking , according to his defenders on the Town Council . `` We looked for aggressive city management , '' said Mayor Gary Flynn , a longtime Long Beach resident who came to Mammoth to publish a magazine . `` We got it . '' Said Councilman Stapp : `` In the nine months that he has been here , we 've probably accomplished three years of business . '' Took Charge Marangella , who came to Mammoth from the Bay Area city of El Cerrito , acknowledges stepping on toes and shaking up things , but says Mammoth Lakes needed to mature as a town . `` The administration was in total disarray , '' he said . `` There 's a little different value system now at the town offices . We do n't accept gifts . . . we 're not doing things in the back rooms . '' He took over just as Mammoth Lakes was finally rebounding from the economic effects of a 1983 U.S. Geological Survey warning that a swarm of earthquakes in the eastern Sierra might presage a volcanic eruption near Mammoth . Cinder cones and steam vents found all over the area indicate a high level of geologic activity , so the alarm was not a total surprise . Property values plummeted after the volcano warning . But a year later , after frenzied lobbying by residents and developers , top U.S. Geological Survey officials said the threat was overstated . Volcanoes are still not a subject spoken of often locally , and the evacuation road that was judiciously carved through a forest is known simply as the Mammoth Lakes `` scenic loop . '' Now town officials have begun plans to change what one calls `` the texture of the community , '' encouraging the first luxury hotels and pedestrian villages with shopping and restaurants for skiers . There is also talk of building a conference center and expanding the airport . The airport is served by a commuter line , Alpha Air , but it has only one runway and can not accommodate jets or strong crosswinds . Projects Under Way On a meadow south of town , the area 's first golf course , plus a hotel and skiers village are now under construction . The developer , Tom Dempsey , is a former ski instructor at Mammoth Mountain who has built hundreds of Mammoth 's condos . Controversial plans to include a new ski area , called Sherwin Bowl , have yet to receive U.S. Forest Service approval . The town 's redevelopment project would be a joint effort of Dempsey and Mammoth Mountain to extend a ski lift into the north village area of Mammoth Lakes and add another hotel . The third big project , still in discussions , would be built in the undeveloped center of town and would also bring a new , luxury-class hotel to a town better known for ski condos and older motel-style lodges . By providing more amenities to skiers and summer tourists , locals hope to give themselves a hedge against the hard times inevitable in a mountain resort . `` It 's a tough town to survive in , '' said Mayor Flynn . `` Living costs are high . Winters can be harsh . You 're totally dependent on the weather , because if there 's no snow there wo n't be any customers . ''