Former Ram offensive lineman Doug France had a blood-alcohol level of at least .13 -- well above the legal limit of .08 -- when he was involved in a two-car crash that killed a Laguna Hills woman , the California Highway Patrol said Tuesday . Officer Ken Daily said additional tests conducted by CHP 's skid-speed experts revealed that France was driving his 1987 BMW at a minimum speed of 81 m.p.h . when it rammed head-on into a car driven by Maria Conception Contreras . Contreras , 53 , was killed in the accident . The posted speed limit on winding Aliso Hills Drive , where the accident occurred Saturday , is 45 m.p.h. , said Daily , who added that samples of France 's blood were taken three hours after the crash . The CHP will use the results of the blood-alcohol tests to recommend to the Orange County District Attorney 's office that France be charged with felony manslaughter and felony drunken driving . Daily said the charges might be filed by early next week . France was listed in serious condition with a concussion and a broken pelvis at the Mission Hospital Regional Medical Center in Mission Viejo . Martin Walker , one of France 's friends , said Tuesday that the two-time all-pro was driving to his townhome in the Crestline complex when he struck Contreras ' 1989 Mazda 323 . France had `` a few drinks '' while he watched the NBA playoffs at a friend 's home , Walker said . France and Contreras were neighbors at Crestline , located on Aliso Hills Drive . France , who owns an office supply company in Irvine , lives with his wife and two sons . Contreras ' 22-year-old daughter , Grasie , said her mother had left home on an errand before the crash . `` She was a really kind person , '' Contreras said . `` She touched the lives of many people . '' Contreras said neither she nor her sister , Angie , 29 , had been contacted by France 's family since the crash . Contreras said she and her sister were not bitter about the accident , although her mother 's death may force them to sell their townhouse . `` We rely on God , '' she said , noting that her mother was a devout Jehovah 's Witness . `` We know that there 's going to be justice . ''