It did not take long for Joni Easterly of Anaheim Katella High School to come up with reasons why her team lost , 59-43 , to Sacramento Grant in the State Division II girls ' championship game Saturday at the Oakland Coliseum Arena . `` We could have run our press break better , '' said Easterly , a Katella guard . `` We could have made some layups and blocked out a lot better on the boards . '' And that was just for starters . Grant outplayed Katella in most every category to win its second consecutive Division II title . It was Grant 's fifth consecutive appearance in a state championship game . The Pacers finished the season with a 32-3 record . Katella , which was playing in its first state final , was 29-4 . Tina Green , one of four Grant players who scored in double figures , had 19 points and 11 rebounds . Shawyna Robertson had 15 , Kimyatta Horton 12 and Tesia Green 10 for Grant . Easterly , who will attend USC , led all scorers with 22 points , but it was not close to being enough for the Knights . After a slow start -- Grant trailed , 16-12 , at the end of the first quarter -- the Pacers jump-started their game . Tina Green , a senior forward , and Robertson led a second-quarter attack that effectively broke Katella 's momentum . The Pacers outscored the Knights , 14-7 , in the second quarter to take a 26-23 lead . After Robertson 's three consecutive baskets opened the third quarter , Grant led , 32-23 , and had control . Katella made a couple of second-half runs to close the deficit but Grant responded each time . The Knights rallied to within four late in the third quarter , 34-30 , on a three-point shot and a fast break layup by guard Angie Gomez . But Tina Green scored on a follow shot and then made a jumper as Grant regained control , 38-30 . Grant then put the game away for good by outscoring Katella , 14-4 , in the first four minutes of the fourth quarter . Easterly fouled out with 3:00 minutes left , but it made little difference by then . `` They were the quickest , best shooting team we 've faced , '' Katella Coach Barb Bausch said . `` We ca n't hold our heads down . We got beat by the best team I 've seen this season . '' Grant 's goal was to hold Easterly , who averages 22 a game , to no more than 20 , and to control the rebounding . `` If we stopped her from scoring 30 points and outrebounded them I thought we would win , '' Coach Connie Zuercher said . Grant outrebounded Katella , 48-25 . The Knights had only four offensive rebounds . `` We worked in practice on allowing them one shot and that 's it , '' Zuercher said .