When I lived in San Francisco a few years ago , I had a neighbor who kept a pair of plastic pink lawn flamingos in a large indoor planter box . They were n't just pink , but an audible , jangling , sizzling , screaming sort of ferocious nuclear meltdown pink that radiated around the room like a carbon arc beam , and my neighbor loved them with a deep , abiding love . They invariably inspired comment . Guests would arrive and immediately reel back out into the hallway , not quite ready to believe what they were seeing . The things might as well have been pink elephants . The last time any of them had seen plastic lawn flamingos ( never mind ones that shot shattering bolts of pink throughout the room ) they had tripped over them in the neighbors ' yard on their way to watch Howdy Doody . Nevertheless , there was something about them , a certain goofy genuineness , a blaring presence that announced that you were in the home of someone who would rather be buried neck deep in an anthill than , say , own a car phone . They were infectious . Guests who had not been to my neighbor 's house before would invariably end up standing on one leg and doing flamingo imitations before the evening was through . And , just as invariably , they would want to know where they , too , could buy a pair . Four hours before , the idea of owning a pair of plastic pink lawn flamingos had about as good a chance of materializing in their minds as the thought of Dan Quayle in a bunny suit . But once the visitors saw them , and lived with them for a bit , they would embark on a holy quest for the things that made the Crusades look like a trip to the 7-Eleven . So , right away , let me save you a bit of time and anguish . Perhaps the easiest way to acquire a pair of plastic pink lawn flamingos is to order them from a truly inspired outfit in Seattle called Archie McPhee and Co . It is a mail-order house and it sells , among other bits of esoterica , Groucho glasses , rubber chickens , plastic tiki lamps , Batman drinking mugs and Be-A-Spy kits . They also sell plastic pink lawn flamingos , each about 3 feet tall , for $ 9.50 a pair , plus $ 3 shipping . Archie McPhee is at P.O . Box 30852 , Seattle , Wash. , 98103-0852 . Or you can place an order by calling ( 206 ) 547-2467 . `` They 've had their ups and downs over the years , but for the most part they 've been a real steady item , '' said Brian Eklund , the office manager of McPhee 's wholesale division . `` The main call for them is for housewarming presents . And a lot of people buy them around Christmastime . They 'll exchange them at office Christmas parties . They 're a real classic kind of tacky joke item . '' A joke to Eklund , perhaps , but they 've been paying Don Featherstone 's freight since he designed the classic 3-D flamingo back in the '50s . Featherstone is the vice president of Union Products of Leominster , Mass. , the manufacturer that introduced the lawn flamingo to the world in 1952 . That first flamingo model , said Featherstone , was plastic and flat and somewhat aesthetically unappealing when contrasted with the present incarnation . The second model was three-dimensional `` but it was made of construction foam and fell apart rather quickly , '' said Featherstone . `` Dogs loved to chew it up . '' Finally , in 1957 , Featherstone hit the mother lode . He sculpted a three-dimensional pink plastic flamingo that was artistic , durable and , for the most part , dog-proof . It is the model that Union Products continues to sell today , complete with Featherstone 's molded signature on the underside of each bird . `` It 's designer poor taste , '' he said . Although easily the most recognized of Union 's products -- it specializes in plastic `` lawn art '' -- the flamingo is not the company 's biggest seller , said Featherstone . Union 's original item , a plastic lawn duck , is still No . 1 , followed by the plastic hen-and-chicks combo . The flamingo is third . The company sells about 250,000 pairs of them each year , said Featherstone . Union also makes plastic squirrels , rabbits , cows -- a total of 50 different plastic animals to strew around the lawn . But , said Featherstone , the flamingo has a devoted cult following . There are several clubs and organizations around the country , he said , that `` do n't really worship the flamingos , but they get together and have parties . In Virginia , there 's a group that has a parade and everybody dresses in pink . They 've been doing it for 12 or 13 years . '' And in Connecticut , he said , there 's a group called the Society for the Preservation of the Pink Plastic Lawn Flamingo . Admittedly , this sort of thing is not for everybody . People who own designer pets , for example , or those who only allow their kids to watch PBS , probably wo n't appreciate the guaranteed double takes that will occur when passers-by notice the hot-pink waterfowl jutting from the bedding plants . If , however , you long to own a couple of non-biodegradable pieces of true Americana , for cheap , signed by the designer himself and guaranteed to jazz up your landscape like a zoot suit jazzes up an inaugural ball , then part with a sawbuck or so and get the birds . Then throw a party and take note of which guests try to stand on one leg . They 're the ones you invite back next time .