Silent screen heroine Madge Bellamy , who had lead roles in the 1920s epics `` Lorna Doone '' and `` The Iron Horse , '' died Wednesday at San Antonio Community Hospital in Upland . Miss Bellamy , 89 , had been hospitalized since Jan. 10 for chronic cardiac problems . One of the last remaining stars of the silent era , she had lived quietly in Riverside and San Bernardino counties for several decades after her film career took a plunge with the advent of the talkies in the 1930s . Born Margaret Philpott on June 30 , 1900 , in Hillsboro , Tex. , Miss Bellamy made her stage debut at age 5 and began studying serious acting a decade later , appearing in several New York theatrical productions as well as the road show of `` Pollyanna . '' The brown-eyed actress made her film debut in 1920 in the screen adaptation of the play , `` The Riddle Woman , '' and had featured roles in 40 silent films . In the John Ford classic , `` The Iron Horse , '' Miss Bellamy portrayed the daughter of the first transcontinental railroad 's chief contractor . She fell in love with the film 's male lead , George O'Brien , as the eastbound and westbound sections of the track were being joined . As `` Lorna Doone , '' Miss Bellamy projected a sweet innocence as the aristocratic girl captured and raised by bandits before being swept away by the dashing hero , played by John Bowers . Miss Bellamy was named `` American Beauty '' by the Hollywood Assn . of Foreign Correspondents in 1928 . She went on to have roles in 10 talking pictures , including `` White Zombie , '' a seminal 1932 horror film in which she starred opposite Bela Lugosi , fresh from his success in `` Dracula . '' After her early Hollywood successes , however , Miss Bellamy attracted far more attention for her tempestuous love life than for her oft-praised acting skills . Her love affairs first drew headlines in 1928 , when she and Los Angeles bond broker Logan Metcalf slipped away to Tijuana to be wed . Within four days , they had separated and Metcalf filed for a divorce . `` She was the sweetest thing in the world while I was courting her , '' Metcalf told a judge . `` . . . ( But ) at our first meal after the wedding she started being temperamental . '' In 1943 , she was charged with assault with a deadly weapon after firing three shots at a boyfriend who jilted her for a model . In testimony , Miss Bellamy claimed that the wealthy lumber company executive had called her his `` little Easter egg '' and promised to marry her . The actress , who added that she was only `` trying to scare the gizzard out of him , '' received a six-month suspended sentence . Settling in Ontario in her later years , the feisty actress remained a witty conversationalist but in a somewhat solitary life style , acquaintances said . She left no known survivors .