The Big West Conference , concerned about requests for changes in starting times and about television 's effects on attendance , was released from the final year of its contract with Prime Ticket Network and is negotiating elsewhere , network and conference officials said Wednesday . Prime Ticket televised more than 130 hours of Big West events during the past year that included football , basketball , softball , baseball and volleyball . It was the second of a three-year agreement . But Prime Ticket , which serves 4.1 million subscribers in Southern California , Arizona , Nevada and Hawaii , had increasingly requested that starting times of games be changed to avoid conflicts with its higher-priority programming . `` As we continued to increase the number of King games , Laker games , Pac-10 and UCLA and USC games , in order to fit the Big West into the package we had to continue to ask them to move starting times and kickoff times , '' said John Severino , Prime Ticket president . `` ( The Big West ) came to us and said the athletic directors were aggravated about the starting times and would we let them out . So we let them out . '' SportsChannel L.A. , which is in 130,000 households , is a possible replacement to carry Big West events . `` We 're in very serious conversation with them , '' said Lynn Woodard , general manager of SportsChannel L.A. `` I think the Big West would be an extremely valuable addition to SportsChannel 's fall and winter programming lineup . '' The Big West , so eager to attract television coverage that it changed its name from Pacific Coast Athletic Assn . in 1988 partly to fit ESPN 's Big Monday basketball program , has found that television coverage can also have disadvantages for a conference still struggling in some areas , particularly in football attendance at schools such as Cal State Long Beach and Cal State Fullerton . Attendance at those schools is an issue because of NCAA requirements for Division I-A football status calling for five of the conference 's eight schools to average 17,000 at home or 20,000 for all games at least once every four years .