Seventeen high school students from the San Fernando , Santa Clarita , Conejo and Simi valleys are among 1,800 recipients of National Merit $ 2,000 Scholarships in 1989 . The nonprofit National Merit Scholarship Corp. , founded in 1955 , honors students based on superior academic and extracurricular accomplishments , reflecting their potential to flourish in college . A national 16-person committee , consisting of college admissions officers and secondary school counselors , chooses each state 's winners in proportion to the size of the state 's graduating class . Each student receives a single allotment of $ 2,000 . Winners of National Merit Scholarships are : Geoffrey A. Talvola of Agoura , Agoura High School ; Michael P. Markmiller of Calabasas , Viewpoint School ; Lynn E. Lapoe of Glendale , Glendale High School ; Christina J. Dixon , Matthew L. Mayers and Mark L. Paskowitz , all of Granada Hills and Granada Hills High School . Jennifer J. Yem of North Hollywood , North Hollywood High School ; Erica B. Palmer of Saugus , Saugus High School ; Gregory Engel and Kathryn Lin , both of Sherman Oaks and the Buckley School ; Omar B. Skulason of Simi Valley , Simi Valley High School ; Grace S. Bhudhikanok of Van Nuys , Birmingham High School . Van Nuys residents Susan S. Huang , Van Nuys High School , and Gayle T. Isa , Ulysses S. Grant High School ; Thousand Oaks residents Jennifer K. Connor , La Reina High School , and Stephen C. Yen , Thousand Oaks High School , and Marc Sarti of Woodland Hills , Taft High School . There are two other categories of National Merit awards : corporate-sponsored scholarships , which are offered to students who have qualifications of particular interest to a sponsoring corporation , and college-sponsored awards that are given to students who will attend colleges and universities that finance Merit Scholarships . About 6,000 Merit Scholarships , totaling about $ 24 million , are offered annually . The program is funded by more than 600 independent-sponsor organizations and institutions .