Odor Zappers are new , all-natural shoe stuffers that eliminate shoe and boot odors . The 100 % cotton bags , filled with minerals mined in Arizona , absorb moisture and odor buildup . They fit all types and sizes of shoes . Each pair can absorb more than 200 grams of moisture , says their manufacturer , Al Letcher of Lancaster . They also eliminate the need for bulky charcoal insoles . `` You can leave them in your shoes whenever you 're not wearing them , '' says Letcher . `` And you can regenerate the bags by hanging them outside on the clothesline in the sun for a couple of days or putting them in the oven ( at 200 degrees Fahrenheit ) for a couple of hours . '' Since the mineral that fills the bags is natural -- it is from the zeolite family -- there 's nothing harmful to people or pets . Odor Zappers are available nationwide for a suggested retail price of $ 3.99 in selected shoe repair shops , sporting goods stores and specialty stores . In Southern California , you can find them in all Nike retail outlets ; Pic ' N Save stores ; Chick 's Sporting Goods in Covina , Upland , Laguna Hills , Yorba Linda and Oceanside ; Anthony 's Shoe Repair in Newport Beach , Corona Del Mar , Santa Ana and Costa Mesa ; Windham 's in Redondo Beach ; Vincent 's Shoe Repair in Fullerton ; Universal Shoe Repair in Newhall ; Everett 's Shoes & Repair in Claremont ; Joe Panza Shoe Repair in La Habra ; Rossmoor USA Shoe Repair in Fountain Valley , and Guarantee Shoe Center in Bakersfield . If you ca n't find Odor Zappers in your area , for the nearest location , contact Letcher & Associates , P.O . Box 107 , Lancaster , Calif. 93534 ; ( 805 ) 942-0428 . Colorful Straws for Brand-Loyal Sippers Sip Top is a new vented straw-like device that fits most standard water , cola and seltzer containers , so you can drink your beverage of choice right out of the bottle , instead of transfering it to one of those plastic sports bottles . `` Studies show that brand-loyal consumers want to be seen with their brand , '' said Randy Hanson , president of Sip Top Marketing Inc. in Culver City . `` Sip Top affords them that , and it has the additional feature of a vent that seals airtight to retain carbonation and freshness and prevents leakage if tipped over . '' The capped straw fits most small , medium and large standard-neck bottles and comes in various colors , including neons . Sip Top is being introduced nationally in convenience stores , health food shops , discount and drug stores , and health and sports clubs . Its suggested retail is $ 1 . In the Los Angeles area , it is available at many 7-Elevens and am/pm mini-markets . If you ca n't find Sip Tops in your area , contact Sip Top Marketing , 8780 National Blvd. , Suite 222 , Culver City , Calif. 90232 ; ( 213 ) 838-9874 . A Hip Way to Hike With the Children Hip Hiker can be a big help to parents who may want to take a child where strollers are not permitted . Good for infants to toddlers , it 's a cotton carrier that fits over the shoulder and slips through a ring near the waist , so the baby 's weight is distributed across the parent 's back and shoulder . It comes in solid colors -- navy , red or gray -- with a print lining and is machine washable . Rosie Puff , the Santa Barbara woman who developed the carriers , says she got the idea from watching mothers in Indonesia carry their children . To order Hip Hiker , write to On the Go , P.O . Box 2352 , Santa Barbara , Calif. , 93120 ; ( 805 ) 965-1408 . It costs $ 25 , plus $ 3 shipping and handling .