The San Diego City Council , after being promised that a revamped Air/Space America will pay off its 1988 air show debt and turn a profit in 1990 , on Monday set up a two-way competition for the right to stage an aerial extravaganza at Brown Field next year . City Manager John Lockwood 's staff was told by council to compare Air/Space America 's 1990 show plans with a proposal to be submitted by U.S. Air Show , a new group . A recommendation is due by April 24 , when council will decide whether to hold another show , whether to contribute $ 300,000 in city funds and which group to back . The decision followed a lengthy presentation by an overhauled team from Air/Space America , which on Feb. 7 lost the right to hold the show . At that time , council , citing doubts about Air/Space America 's financial acumen and the 1988 show debt , abruptly canceled the show and withdrew $ 300,000 in funding from hotel tax revenue . Damage to Brown Field The show also caused at least $ 65,000 in damage to Brown Field -- Councilman Bob Filner claimed Monday that the total is closer to $ 200,000 -- and resulted in some subcontractors suing the city to recoup losses . But Air/Space America promised Monday to pay off the debt before next year 's May 4 show and to turn a profit of more than $ 900,000 from the 10-day event . Last year 's show featured aerial acrobatics , trade booths , paratroop jumps and rides on the supersonic Concorde jet . `` We hope to finish off this debt even before we hold the show , '' said Dick Shigley , the organization 's new vice-president for finance and operations . The group also promised to keep the show in San Diego and end its adversary relationship with Lockwood 's office , which had insisted on a performance bond for last year 's show but was overruled by council . New executives and subcontractors have been added to the Air/Space group , and retired Rear Adm. Bill Walsh , whom some council members believe was the cause of last year 's money problems , has been relieved of financial responsibilities . `` We 're going to get along with the city , '' Shigley said . `` That 's the bottom line . '' About $ 1 million in up-front revenue is expected to come from show `` boosters , '' who will be asked to put up $ 25 each . In addition , organizers hope to get at least $ 500,000 from large corporations , which will be asked to join six other large firms that paid $ 100,000 to become `` founders '' of the 1988 show . Air/Space America has also signed up the Lufkin Group , which its officials described as an international marketing firm capable of generating large revenues by lining up official sponsors for the show . President Paul Lufkin said that the organization 's revenue estimates for the show are understated . Debt Figures Lockwood acknowledged Monday that Air/Space America 's 1988 debt is actually $ 2.7 million to $ 2.9 million , as the group has claimed since the debt controversy began two months ago . An audit conducted for the city had placed the debt at $ 4.2 million , but Lockwood told the council that Air/Space America will not be required to pay off the entire sum . Air/Space America , for example , said it does not intend to pay about $ 1 million to an unlicensed paving contractor who they maintain failed to adequately surface Brown Field . Council members acknowledged that the show , which in its first try became the world 's third largest , is an important source of revenue and publicity for the city . But they expressed wariness about another debacle of unfulfilled promises , debts , traffic snafus , legal problems and damage to city-owned Brown Field . `` This is a wonderful thing for San Diego if you guys have your act together , and that 's what we 're asking you to convince us , '' Councilman Bruce Henderson said . The U.S. Air Show group , organized by four men who oversaw major parts of the 1988 Air/Space America show but have since split from the group , must quickly submit a plan to Lockwood 's office to be considered for next year 's show . The group appears to lack Air/Space America 's political connections . It was Air/Space America founder and former Congressman Bob Wilson , along with former Congressman Lionel Van Deerlin , who appealed to Mayor Maureen O'Connor to schedule Monday 's hearing . Wilson , who is chief executive officer of the organization , led Monday 's presentation and has been lobbying council members for support .