In what was called the largest private `` debt-for-nature '' swap to date , the government of Costa Rica has agreed to take new steps to save its vanishing tropical forests in exchange for a reduction in its foreign debt , it was disclosed Thursday . Under an agreement announced in Washington , Costa Rica will not have to repay a $ 5.6-million loan it owed the American Express Bank . The bank wrote off the loan as a bad debt , took a tax deduction and sold the debt paper to the Nature Conservancy , a Washington-based private , nonprofit conservation organization , for $ 784,000 . The Nature Conservancy and another private environmental group in Costa Rica then renegotiated the loan with the government . Under the new terms , the government will owe $ 1.7 million plus interest , which will be used to issue Costa Rican currency bonds that will finance the tropical forest preservation project as well as other conservation measures involving 355,000 acres . The exchange is the fifth such transaction and part of a developing trend in dealing with Third World debt while encouraging conservation of what are coming to be known as the `` global commons , '' precious natural resources that are critical links in preventing or minimizing worldwide environmental problems such as global warming . Third World countries collectively owe $ 1.3 trillion in foreign debt and many are forced to service that debt by exploiting natural resources to earn hard currency to repay their loans . `` The monumental environmental problems facing the world are going to require creative solutions , '' Jeff Wise of the Nature Conservancy said Thursday in a telephone interview from Washington . `` Debt for nature . . . is a model for imaginative ways of dealing with the unimaginable -- the loss of a large portion of the world 's animal species . '' He added that as debt-for-nature transactions increase in size , more indebted countries may be encouraged to participate . Last year , for example , a $ 30-million government-to-government debt-for-nature exchange was negotiated in Costa Rica by the Dutch government , while the World Wildlife Fund put together a $ 5.4-million package . Such exchanges were recommended late last year to President-elect Bush in an extensive review of environmental issues funded by major U.S. corporations and foundations . Ecuador has also made provisions for such exchanges . While Costa Rica has the most extensive park system in the developing world with 11 % of its land in national parks and another 14 % in some protective status , it experiences the highest deforestation rates outside its parks of any country in the Western Hemisphere , the Nature Conservancy said . Each year , 4 % of Costa Rica 's total forest cover is lost to development . If that trend continues for a decade , the conservancy said , there would be no productive forest outside protected areas . Each year tropical forests covering an area the size of Austria are cleared and burned to make way for housing , agriculture and other development , according to Irving Mintzer of the World Resources Institute . That amounts to 54 acres each minute . It has been estimated , for example , that the burning of rain forests for development and agriculture contributes as much as 20 % of the total human contribution of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere . Carbon dioxide is a major contributor to the so-called greenhouse effect , a postulated international warming trend . In addition , tropical forests are significant reservoirs of biological diversity . It has been estimated that 75 % of all species on Earth are located in tropical regions . Assisting the Nature Conservancy in purchasing the $ 5.6-million Costa Rican debt were the Stroud Foundation ; the Noyes Foundation ; the W. Alton Jones Foundation ; the MacArthur Foundation ; the World Wildlife Fund ; the National Parks Foundation of Costa Rica ; the government of Holland ; the Swedish Society for the Conservation of Nature , and the People 's Trust for Endangered Speces based in Great Britain .