Under the militant banner of `` spiritual warfare , '' growing numbers of evangelical and charismatic Christian leaders are preparing broad assaults on what they call the cosmic powers of darkness . Fascinated with the notion that Satan commands a hierarchy of territorial demons , some mission agencies and big-church pastors are devising strategies for `` breaking the strongholds '' of those evil spirits alleged to be controlling cities and countries . Some proponents in the fledgling movement already maintain that focused prayer meetings have ended the curse of the Bermuda Triangle , led to the 1987 downfall in Oregon of free-love guru Baghwan Shree Rajneesh and , for the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles , produced a two-week drop in the crime rate , a friendly atmosphere and unclogged freeways . This is not the cinematic story line for a religious sequel to `` Ghostbusters II , '' yet the developing scenario does have a fictional influence ; interest in spiritual warfare has been heightened by two best-selling novels at Christian bookstores . `` This Present Darkness , '' by Frank Peretti , describes the religious fight against `` territorial spirits mobilized to dominate a small town . '' A second novel by Peretti has a similar premise . Fuller Seminary Prof. C. Peter Wagner , who has written extensively on the subject , led a `` summit '' meeting on cosmic-level spiritual warfare Monday in Pasadena with two dozen men and women , including a Texas couple heading a group called the `` Generals of Intercession '' and an Oregon man who conducts `` spiritual warfare boot camps . '' In his opening remarks , Wagner said : `` The ( Holy ) Spirit is saying something to churches through these ( Peretti ) books even though they are fiction . People are reading these books that would never read our books . '' Contrary to segments of Christianity that think of the devil as a biblical-era representation of evil not too credible or useful today , theologically conservative churches virtually assume that Satan is a real , active being in the world . Moreover , in Pentecostal and charismatic churches -- where speaking in tongues , healing and other supernatural `` gifts of the Holy Spirit '' are practiced -- some clergy conduct `` deliverance ministries '' in which they claim to exorcise personal demons . But clergy exploring high-level spiritual warfare point to the Letter to the Ephesians , among other biblical sources , for their marching orders against `` world rulers of this present darkness . '' Some say they have discerned the names of the ruling princes . Nevertheless , caution was expressed at the Pasadena meeting for several reasons . Ridicule from the outside world and by more moderate churchgoers is one concern . `` I do n't want to get so far out that they think I 'm L. Ron Hubbard , '' said the Rev . Dick Bernal of San Jose , referring to the late science fiction writer and Scientology founder . `` This is exciting , '' the pastor added . `` But what 's flaky , what 's believable , what 's scriptural ? '' Bernal 's own literature , however , appears more confident -- suggesting that an evil prince over part of the United States `` is a religious spirit who keeps people bound up in useless traditions '' and giving directions for removing a curse on a neighborhood . Another cause for caution , said Wagner , is the danger involved : `` If you do not know what you are doing , and few . . . have the necessary expertise , Satan will eat you for breakfast . '' As a means of protection against the demonic while they met for eight hours Monday at Lake Avenue Congregational Church , organizers arranged for a comparable number of relatives and friends to pray continuously in a nearby room . A third concern , barely aired at the Pasadena conference , is whether other cultures are defamed with the suggestion that only evangelical Christianity is free of demonic influence . Demons were also blamed for the growth of New Age beliefs , the spread of illegal drugs , pornography `` and the militant force of the Islamic movement '' by Tom White of Corvallis , Ore. , a conference participant who conducts what he calls spiritual warfare boot camps for local churches . One disagreement over strategy was apparent . White has questioned whether the Bible or the church today dictates a `` holy crusade '' seeking out evil presences . `` We do not go looking for this level of battle , but we let it find us , '' he said . But John Dawson of Los Angeles , Southwest director for Youth With a Mission , recommends the offensive . `` We need to overcome the enemy before we employ other methods of ministry among people , '' Dawson wrote in his book , `` Taking Our Cities for God . '' God , it was suggested at the close of the meeting , endorsed the offensive strategy . Nearly all conferees laced their comments with something `` that God told me , '' but Dawson 's mother , Bible teacher Joy Dawson of Tujunga , said God had revealed seven principles to her at 4:30 a.m. that same day . The final point was the importance of being on the offense -- `` not waiting for the enemy to attack , '' she said . The demon-fighting strategists in Pasadena included several who had taken part in a series of spiritual warfare workshops last July in Manila at a major gathering on world evangelization . The Pasadena meeting featured executives Samuel Kamaleson and John Robb of World Vision International in Monrovia as well as representatives of various evangelical mission agencies . Another conferee , Pastor Jack Hayford of the large Church on the Way in Van Nuys , told participants Monday that he has been interested since 1973 in `` confrontation with the demonic . '' Hayford , a low-key Pentecostal preacher widely admired beyond his own Four Square Gospel denomination , is also the originator of the now quarterly `` Love L.A. '' prayer meetings . About 1,000 pastors and church workers attended the fourth such prayer session Tuesday at Hollywood First Presbyterian Church . The stated purposes are merely to pray for each other and for solutions to the city 's problems , but spokesmen acknowledged this week that `` spiritual warfare '' on behalf of Los Angeles is part of the reason for the three-hour meetings . Prayers were said Tuesday morning for the homeless , drug addicts and abused children and against abortion , pornography and other societal ills , according the Rev . Scott Bauer , an associate pastor at Church on the Way . `` Demons were certainly mentioned , '' Bauer said , citing New Testament references . But Bauer and the host pastor for the prayer meetings , the Rev . Lloyd John Ogilvie , emphasized in separate interviews that the main purpose was to make an interracial , interdenominational show of mutual support . `` The cliche , 'We need each other , ' has lost its purely sentimental appeal and becomes a deeper , more profound reality , '' said the Rev . Donn Moomaw , pastor of Bel Air Presbyterian Church , in endorsing the prayer marathons . But the cosmic , darkness-fighting dimension of the meetings was cited by other clergy , including Bishop Charles E. Blake of the Church of God in Christ , Raymundo Diaz Jr. of Angelus Temple and Dennis N. Baker , general director of the Conservative Baptist Assn . of Southern California .