When it came to keeping his patients fully informed about their health , Dr. Nelson Kraus used a method of communication that might have made some physicians bristle . `` I used to sit down at a round table beside the patient , '' Kraus said . `` I 'd put a tape recorder in the middle of that table , put in a 60-minute cassette and we 'd talk . Then I 'd give the tape to the patients so they could take it home and replay it . `` They loved it . They said they played it several times and each time they heard something they had n't heard before . And they played it with other family members . '' Kraus , a former family practitioner working in medical communication for the past 10 years , says other doctors may not agree with the way that he communicated with his patients . `` Some doctors would have said the first place the patient goes with that tape is to the lawyer , '' he said , but noted that such openness between patient and doctor could cut down on the malpractice suits . `` The more information the patient gets , the more involved the patient gets with the care , the less likely the patient is to sue , '' he said . `` The doctor becomes a partner , but the doctor is not responsible . The patient is responsible for his own health . '' Kraus parlayed his communicating skills into the Health News Network , a series of health vignettes that air on 31 radio stations in four states and a Columbus television station , but he acknowledged that there are difficulties on both sides for that communication . `` Patients are intimidated by a person who knows a lot of things they do n't , '' he said . `` There is a fear on the part of the patient that if he becomes angry or upset , the quality of care may go down . '' Doctors are busy , often seeing as many as 85 sick people a day , he said . By the nature of their training , some doctors can be egocentric and arrogant , and some do n't know how to communicate . `` They know how to ask questions , they know how to interrupt answers , and they know how to give orders , '' he said . But he 's a firm believer that the patient needs to be the aggressor when it comes to talking with the doctor . `` There 's a difference between talking to and talking with , '' he said . `` Talking with means the doctor has to do a lot of listening . '' He suggests that the patient try and talk to the doctor on an equal basis . `` Here 's someone with a high school education or less , looking at someone who is speaking a foreign language to him , '' he said . To complicate matters is the dynamics of the situation . The patient usually is sitting on an examining table , wearing a flimsy gown and shivering . The doctor , wearing a white coat , is standing there holding the patient 's records . Kraus suggests that the doctor and patient try to talk when the patient is fully clothed and that the doctor not sit behind a desk . `` The patient should position himself between the door and the doctor , '' he said . `` The doctor would have to go over , under , around and through the patient to get out of the office . '' He also suggests that the patient jot down questions between visits and have that paper in hand when facing the doctor . The patient should also write down things that the doctor says in the office . `` One reason patients do n't hear or retain is that they are nervous and they are scared of what they do n't want to hear , '' Kraus said .