To help you get the best and most economical performance from your air conditioner ( room or central ) , here are a few simple hints to recall as the dog days of summer send the thermometer red-lining skyward . If your house has an attic , vent it with a fan so that heated air does not seep into living areas . Use shades and Venetian blinds on windows to keep out sunlight ; install outside awnings . As soon as possible in the evening , shut off air conditioning and use a window fan to pull in cool air . All duct piping should be well-insulated , especially in high-heat areas such as the attic or in ceiling runs . Set your thermostat at 78 degrees . Southern California Edison Co. says that raising indoor temperature from 70 to a still-comfortable 78 can mean a 30 % savings on your electric bill . Install tinted windows to help reflect hot sunlight . Close the fresh-air vent when running a room air conditioner . It will cool more efficiently . Also , on humid days , set the fan speed on low ; you will sacrifice some cooling but more moisture should be pulled from the air . Avoid installing a room air conditioner in direct sunlight . Solar heating of metal parts can slow dissipation of room heat . If your room air conditioner has plenty of cooling capacity , set up a fan or fans to help spread cooling to other rooms . Heat from nearby lamps and televisions may be sensed by thermostats , causing air conditioners to run longer than needed . Keep these appliances away from air conditioning controls . Be careful when turning off air conditioning systems if you have small pets in the house . According to Cheri McCully , a veterinary technician at Grand Avenue Pet Hospital in Santa Ana , 85 degrees is about tops for caged animals such as hamsters and birds . Cats and dogs tolerate heat better , but temperatures much above 90 degrees are not recommended for long periods of time . Older pets or those in poor health will need cooler environments . If you are going to be away from home for the day and it is expected to be a scorcher , set the thermostat accordingly . McCully also warns not to turn on fans for pet cooling while you are gone because of the danger of electrical fires . CLARK SHARON