The City of San Diego will lose an estimated $ 40,000 for each baseball game at San Diego Jack Murphy Stadium that is canceled because of the ongoing labor dispute between professional baseball players and team owners , Assistant City Manager Jack McGrory said Friday . `` It now appears very likely that the current baseball strike will affect the opening of the regular season , '' Assistant City Manager Jack McGrory said in a memo issued Friday to city officials . It was uncertain on Friday , however , if the labor dispute would be settled in time to avert the cancellation of Padres home games in early April . The Padres ' regular baseball season is scheduled to begin Monday , April 2 , in Los Angeles . After four games against the Dodgers , the Padres return to San Diego for their 1990 home opener Friday , April 6 , with the Cincinnati Reds . Following that three-game stand , the Dodgers are scheduled to travel to San Diego for a three-game stand beginning April 10 . In addition to the $ 40,000 in ticket and parking revenue that the city would lose for each game , McGrory estimated that various employees working at the stadium -- including concession workers , ushers and parking attendants -- would lose $ 60,000 in wages per game . There are also other indirect economic impacts to the city such as the lost expenditures from visiting teams and fans , according to McGory . `` We 're hoping it does n't happen , '' stadium manager Bill Wilson said Friday . `` But if ( a cancellation occurs ) we lose 10 % of ticket sales , which amounts to $ 23,000 per game , average . . . and $ 28,000 for parking revenue . '' However , that $ 51,000 gross revenue loss would be trimmed because the city wo n't have to absorb expenses generated by baseball games . The stadium wo n't have to pay $ 4,500 for cleanup crews after each canceled games and the police department wo n't be paid $ 3,500 for patrolling the parking lot on game days . Wilson said the cancellation of some baseball games could stymie the stadium 's ongoing attempt to retain part-time custodial employees at the stadium . `` We 've assembled a cast of people who are waiting to go to work , '' Wilson said . `` We 've worked all winter to hire them and I 'm sure some of them are going to look elsewhere '' if early season games are canceled . The city-run stadium is n't the only operation that would lose revenue if the labor dispute is not settled soon . `` For each game that is n't played it means 50 or 60 people out of a job , '' said a spokesman for Ace Parking , which holds the stadium parking lot contract . `` For Ace , it means a difference on profit and loss . We could lose a couple of thousand ( of dollars ) a month if they cancel a lot of games . '' `` The Padres just are not generating any kind of interest in the community right now , '' said Jim Oakley , an executive at Air Ads Inc. , a Brown Field-based firm that operates banner-towing aircraft that fly over the stadium on game days . `` I know of one client of ours in San Francisco who has put a new promotion on hold until this thing is resolved , so it 's definitely having an impact . '' When the Padres are drawing good crowds , Air Ads regularly includes the stadium in its advertising loops that extent West to the beaches . `` When you 've got 40,000 to 50,000 captive readers , ( the banners ) are like required reading . Everybody looks up to see what they say . '' Bus lines also would lose revenue if home games are canceled . `` We book four to six buses per week to Padres games , '' said Gus Zemba , president and co-owner of Kopecki Bus Lines in San Diego . `` We have n't had cancellations yet , though , because it 's too early . '' However , Kopecki already has cancelled two dozen charters to Yuma . `` We typically do quite a few trips to ( the Padres ' spring training games ) in Yuma , but that 's all out the window now . '' KFMB-AM , the radio voice of the Padres , has filled programming holes caused by the cancellation of pre-season baseball games with `` fantasy baseball games , '' according to KFMB Station Manager Paul Palmer . The Padres are 19-0 in the fictional games , Palmer said , but KFMB would `` much rather be broadcasting baseball . . . we 're innocent bystanders along with the fans . '' KFMB pays the Padres Baseball Club for the right to broadcast the games , so it will receive rebates for games not played . But KFMB generates baseball-related revenue by selling advertising that runs during pre- and post-game shows . In the event of cancellations , KFMB would continue to fill the ballgame time slots with sports-oriented programming , including more `` fantasy '' games . `` We did that during the last strike and it worked pretty well , '' Palmer said . However , `` what we 'd miss would be the numbers in terms of ratings generated by the actual games , '' Palmer said . The loss of baseball games would mean little to San Diego Transit , which runs a dozen or so buses to home games . `` If the Pads do n't play , we 'll actually save money because we usually take a loss on Padres service , '' a bus system spokesman said . `` Only on the bigger events -- things like the home opener , the Sky Show , Cap Night -- do we break even . ''