Nestled in the Whittier Hills sits a ridge-top plateau of pristine , prime real estate with a view of the Pacific on a clear day . The city of Whittier first sought to make this the home of a Nixon library more than two decades ago . And again seven years ago . And four more years ago . But today , the champagne toasting the dedication of the $ 21-million library flows in Yorba Linda , Nixon 's birthplace and now-chosen resting place for the former President 's selected archives . `` We were terribly shocked , '' former Whittier Mayor Victor Lopez said recently of Nixon 's decision to locate his private library elsewhere . `` It would have been a boost to Whittier , Whittier College and the whole thing . We were terribly disappointed . '' Gene Chandler , another of the city 's former mayors , added : `` We always figured that Whittier was his home . '' It is easy to understand Whittier 's claim to the 37th President . Although Richard M. Nixon was born in Yorba Linda , it was in Whittier that he spent his high school and college years . He met his wife in Whittier and practiced law here . And Whittier Republicans helped him start his political career , a successful bid to unseat Democratic incumbent Jerry Voorhis in a congressional district that encompassed the city and nearby communities . Nixon entered Whittier as a child ; he left it as a figure in national politics . `` We felt we had a complete inside track historically , '' Chandler said , `` with Whittier representing most of his life . It was n't to be . '' Whittier 's first effort to claim the library began shortly after Nixon 's 1968 presidential triumph over Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey . Whittier College helped to lead the bid for the library , which enjoyed strong community support . `` His presidency was important at the time to the college , '' said Joseph Dmohowski , special collections librarian at Whittier College . `` It attracted a lot of students to the college . '' The city presented the then-President with a handsome , oversize , leather-bound and cloth-lined tome titled `` The Richard M. Nixon Presidential Library , Whittier , California . '' It contained pictorial highlights of Whittier and Nixon 's career , intimately connecting the two on thick cardboard pages . `` It would be a great honor to see your presidential library standing on that Whittier hilltop , purchased with hopes just as high , '' wrote then-Mayor Keith Miller and Frederick Binder , who was Whittier College 's president . Local Nixon friends and supporters also commissioned `` The Nixon Trail : A Site Feasibility Study for the Richard M. Nixon Presidential Library . '' Prepared by a prestigious architectural firm , the study contained a picture of a three-dimensional rendering of the library , which was envisioned sitting on a ridge among 120 acres of Whittier hillside -- above where the city 's landfill is now located . The proposed complex consisted of two sets of concentric circles terraced down the hillside . There were also artists ' conceptions of the library interior . The central gallery would feature NASA rockets and space capsules , which at the time is what the artists guessed would be remembered about the Nixon Administration . Indeed , the library study was submitted shortly after the first moon landing in December , 1969 . In addition , the study 's authors proposed a historical trail winding through Whittier that included stops at the site of the favorite son 's old law firm ( Wingert , Bewley & Nixon ) , three schools he attended , four former Nixon residences , the site of his father 's store , the Quaker church and the location of his wedding reception . Clearly , everything was on course . Then came Watergate . Although most Whittier residents remained sympathetic to Nixon , the impetus for the library literally dissolved as the scandal forced Nixon 's resignation in August 1974 . Choosing a location for his archives became a low priority . `` There was no discussion of the library for a long time after he left office , '' said Bruce Martin , executive manager of the Whittier Chamber of Commerce . `` The trials were still going on . I think everything went on hold . '' `` Had it not been for Watergate , ( the library ) would have been here , '' said Clint Harris , a lifelong Nixon friend and Whittier resident who used to scrimmage head to head with the future President on the Whittier College football team . Whittier , though , was a finalist for the site , along with Yorba Linda and San Clemente , which was the location of Nixon 's Western White House . This time , Whittier 's offer had shrunk to 20 acres , but it included the same spectacular ridge . Lopez remembered attending a dinner party at the home of local Nixon boosters Ed and Ruth Shannon . Nixon 's representatives were there , along with most of the City Council . `` It was a gorgeous evening , '' Lopez said . `` The hills we were overlooking , that was the Nixon site . We talked financing and so forth . We were willing to put in the road , sewage , water and to give them the land . It was all positive . They liked the site , the view and the town . `` When they left that evening , they said , 'It looks pretty good to us . ' `` In the very next day 's paper , Lopez said , he learned that San Clemente had been selected . In her personal files , Ruth Shannon said , she has a letter from Nixon describing his vacillation and agonizing . `` He said , 'If I followed my heart , it would go to Whittier . ' He felt it should be at San Clemente because of his years at the White House , '' Shannon said . By 1986 , however , an unexpected problem had thwarted the San Clemente plans , and the search for a library site was on again . Whittier officials began their third and final bid for it . At one point , the city wooed Nixon representatives by pitching a tent and a display at the proposed site , Chandler said . But for the most part , the lobbying went on behind the scenes . It helped that Yorba Linda already had preserved Nixon 's birthplace as a historic site and could offer an adjacent land parcel for the library . So Yorba Linda , a sleepy Orange County suburb , is looking forward to an estimated 350,000 library visitors a year and the tourist dollars they will leave behind . Whittier , a city still trying to rebuild from the October 1987 earthquake , will sorely miss the income and the prestige , city officials said .