So much for John Featherstone 's prediction . The El Camino College football coach said his team would be tested in its Mission Conference opener Saturday night against visiting Orange Coast . But after overpowering Antelope Valley in their opener two weeks ago , the Warriors could have used a better test . El Camino , which has been idle since Sept. 9 , kept a nine-game winning streak alive by defeating Orange Coast , 36-17 , in what turned out to be more of a scrimmage . The Warriors , ranked No . 10 in the nation by the JC Grid-Wire and No . 4 in the state by the JC Athletic Bureau , improved their record to 2-0 , while unranked Orange Coast fell to 1-1 . El Camino was extremely productive against the Pirates ' defense . Sophomore quarterback Frank Dolce completed 20 of 28 passes for 277 yards . With nine minutes left in the third quarter , Dolce completed a 48-yard bomb to sophomore David Blakes . A minute later , he found Al Savea open in the end zone on a three-yard pass that gave El Camino a 30-3 edge . Orange Coast scored its first touchdown four minutes later when quarterback Greg Angelovic connected with Tim Parker on a 25-yard pass that made the score 30-9 . Angelovic completed 6 of 17 passes for 90 yards . With 8:51 left to play in the game the Pirates scored again on a 13-yard run by Jason McGehee . Mike Vaez ran for the two-point conversion to make it 30-17 . The Warriors answered with their last touchdown , a 4-yard run by sophomore running back Alfred Lowe with 6:19 left to play . `` I realized we got a little sloppy in the third quarter , '' Featherstone said , `` but when you 're up like we were , that happens . I was really pleased with our effort . '' It was evident from the start that El Camino was anxious to get the show started . The Warriors had lengthy drives in the first half , and Dolce completed 12 of 18 passes for 170 yards and one touchdown . Freshman Louis Perez kicked a 46-yard field goal on El Camino 's first possession . El Camino also scored on its next possession , a 66-yard drive capped by Dolce 's 3-yard pass to freshman wide receiver Shannon Thompson , and led 23-3 at the half . El Camino plays top-ranked Fullerton on the road next Saturday . The Warriors ' last loss was against Fullerton on Oct.1 of last year .