Under pressure from Latinos , the Carlsbad City Council voted unanimously Tuesday night to make a last-minute application for a $ 157,000 federal grant to provide Spanish-speaking residents with special library service . The council 's action appears to have mended fences after a city official 's earlier refusal to put the grant application on the council agenda had angered some Latino activists . Still , the 5-0 decision to apply for the grant by today 's deadline includes a condition . The council , worried that the city will be stuck with paying for the library program after the first year , wo n't accept the grant until its potential fiscal impact is studied . Some residents of Carlsbad 's downtown barrio of 9,000 Latinos urged the council to give them a place to learn American laws , where to find tax information and how to seek a driver 's license . `` We Hispanics are willing to obey all the rules of this country , '' said Luis Maldonado , who spoke through an interpreter . `` But a lot of times we do n't do it because we do n't know the process . '' He said many Latinos `` do n't even know how to use a telephone directory . '' `` Our knowledge is very limited , we need a trustworthy source of information , '' Maldonado said . `` The place where we come from , there are not too many libraries . '' Clifford Lange , the city library director , told the council he has long been concerned with serving the city 's Latino population . But he said a survey revealed that `` the library is perceived as an Anglo institution largely irrelevant to Hispanic lives . '' Although the city 's main library at the Civic Center is less than a mile from the barrio , Lange said , `` the psychological difference between the library and the neighborhood is immense . '' As Lang envisions a temporary , `` transitional '' information and referral center to serve Latinos by , among other things , helping them get tax aid , find English classes and provide a children 's library . It would have a bilingual staff consisting of a manager , an assistant and three part-time clerks . Lang believes a state grant will `` lay the groundwork '' leading to a permanent program funded by the library when the grant runs out . The grant became controversial last week when Assistant City Manager Frank Mannen , believing the grant 's financial impact on the city was n't fully known , did n't put the matter on the council agenda in time for the grant application deadline . Gloria Valencia-Cothran and other local activists called Mannen 's decision a `` slap '' at the Latino community that showed how little regard City Hall has for Latino needs . Mayor Bud Lewis called a special meeting to consider the application , and council members , after asking a few questions , voted without comment . The action soothed injured feelings . Valencia-Cothran thanked the council and said , `` We see this as an opportunity for these young families in the barrio to participate in their children 's education . ''