In other baseball games : Monroe 6 , Reseda 6 ( forfeit ) -- Reseda forfeited the game when pitcher Tony Valdez faked an injury in the bottom of the eighth inning of the Mid-Valley League contest at Monroe . According to Monroe Coach Kevin Campbell , Reseda Coach Steve Stone did not want Valdez to pitch in the eighth inning , but Valdez had taken his warm-up pitches and was therefore required to pitch to at least one batter . Upon throwing his first pitch to Ernie Echeveste , Valdez fell to the ground holding his ankle . At that point , the umpire called the game . `` The umpire saw what happened , said Reseda forfeited the game and was gone , '' Campbell said . Monroe 's Henry Valdez had tripled in two runs with two out in the bottom of the seventh to tie the score . Taft 7 , Canoga Park 3 -- The Toreadors exploded for four runs in the fourth inning to break open a close contest in the West Valley League game at Lanark Park . Jason Shapiro led off the game with a single , extending his hitting streak to eight games . Taft ( 6-2 , 3-0 ) won its third game in a row . Kennedy 19 , Granada Hills 7 -- Mike Murray hit a three-run home run and walked five times for Kennedy in the North Valley League game at Granada Hills . Four Granada Hills pitchers gave up 15 walks and 15 hits . Garrett Anderson paced the Golden Cougars with four hits and four runs batted in . Travis Bourne and Pat DeBoer each had two hits and three RBIs for Kennedy ( 6-2 , 2-1 ) , which scored in every inning except the first . Van Nuys 7 , Birmingham 1 -- Lorenzo Morales had a double and a triple and scored three runs , and Mike Engler added a three-run home run for Van Nuys in the Mid-Valley League game at Birmingham . Matt Mowry doubled for the Braves ' only extra-base hit . Van Nuys won its third consecutive league game without a loss . Grant 11 , Sylmar 0 -- Javier Delahoya , who struck out seven and limited Sylmar to four hits , hit a three-run home run in the fifth in the Valley Pac-8 League game . Neil Simon contributed to the six-run fifth by hitting a bases-loaded double . Jeff Boardo hit a double and single . Poly 17 , North Hollywood 2 -- Adulfo Hernandez hit a triple and a three-run home run and had five RBIs to pace the Parrots in an East Valley League game at North Hollywood . Eddie Chavez had five RBIs and Harold Whiteside hit a three-run home run . David Giatti ( 2-0 ) struck out eight .