Hate your job ? Love your job ? Part of the reason may be your genes , a study suggests . By studying identical twins who grew up in different families , researchers found evidence that genes influence a worker 's satisfaction with his job . That may be part of the reason some people seem happy no matter what they do , while others have trouble finding a satisfying job , said industrial psychologist Richard Arvey . The findings do not suggest that people who dislike their jobs are genetically doomed to unhappiness at work . The apparent genetic impact is quite modest , and like other genetic influences it may be modifiable by environment , Arvey said in a recent telephone interview . The study is presented in April 's issue of the Journal of Applied Psychology by Arvey , a professor at the Industrial Relations Center of the University of Minnesota 's Carlson School of Management , and university colleagues Lauren Abraham , Thomas Bouchard , Jr. and Nancy Segal . Arvey said the study does not prove genetic influence over job satisfaction , but only supports the idea . He also noted that the study was small , and urged caution in applying the results to the general population . Link to Previous Research Two scientists who have studied genetic influence on personality commented that the new findings fit in with previous research . John Loehlin of the University of Texas at Austin said other research suggests genetic influence on personality and temperament , and an effect on job satisfaction appears plausible . Richard Rose of Indiana University in Bloomington said Finnish studies of twins have found evidence that genes may influence a person 's job choice , satisfaction with life , and frequency of changing jobs for such reasons as dissatisfaction or being fired . But psychologist Leon Kamin of Northeastern University , who has analyzed nature-vs.-nurture research , said he is skeptical . Kamin said previous studies showed that twins reared apart tend to grow up in similar family environments , which he said could explain such similarities as degree of job satisfaction . The new study focused on 34 pairs of identical twins who had been separated at an average age of less than 6 months . They were not reunited until about age 32 , on average . Twenty-five of the pairs were female . Each twin completed a 20-item questionnaire about satisfaction with the `` major job '' in his or her life . Arvey said the job list was diverse , including research chemist , coal miner , assembly line worker , computer analyst , machinist , nurse and financial planner . Seventeen women said being a housewife was their major job . Comparing jobs held by each member of twin pairs , researchers found evidence that twins tended to hold jobs with similar degrees of mental complexity , physical demands and physical coordination requirements . Personality Factor That finding supports the notion that genes also affect which jobs people seek , researchers said . But analysts contend that it does not explain the apparent genetic influence on job satisfaction . Arvey said there are several possible ways genes could influence happiness in the workplace . Affecting personality is a `` very likely mechanism , '' he said . Alternatively , genes may influence what people pay attention to on the job , such as supervision , he said , or they may affect what people want out of a job .