To the surprise and cheer of insurance industry representatives , consumer advocate Ralph Nader said Sunday that under the terms of Proposition 103 , as rewritten by the California Supreme Court , companies might be entitled to a 12 % to 15 % annual profit . Under May 's high court decision , Insurance Commissioner Roxani Gillespie is supposed to assure that the companies receive a `` fair and reasonable rate of return '' when she decides on exemptions from Proposition 103-mandated rollbacks and approves proposed new rates submitted by the companies . Examination of Books Urged Nader cautioned that , before the bottom line is calculated , there has to be careful examination of each company 's books by Gillespie to determine whether it is holding excess money in reserve and whether its stated costs are reasonable . But his endorsement of the 12 % to 15 % profit heartened insurers attending the annual convention of the Independent Insurance Agents and Brokers of California and appeared to cause some discomfort to Proposition 103 author Harvey Rosenfield . Nader , Rosenfield and a number of insurance industry representatives were appearing in a lengthy debate that marked the opening session of the convention at the Hotel del Coronado . Much of what was said had been heard many times before , but Nader 's use of specific figures to describe a permissible insurance company profit went beyond what even Gillespie has been willing to do . She has steadfastly avoided citing any numbers as a reasonable profit . At a news conference that followed the debate , Robert Vagley , president of the American Insurance Assn. , said that 12 % to 15 % would be `` a far more generous rate of return than the industry has seen in California '' and that if Gillespie should adhere to such a standard , `` it would put upward pressure on rates . '' Rosenfield , asked if he agreed with Nader , said , `` I think it 's a mistake to focus on a number . '' In setting rates of return , he said , regulators should distinguish between efficient insurance companies and the `` typical slothful , wasteful '' ones . It was one of the few times in the long , contentious debate over insurance issues in California that Rosenfield had taken even mild exception to anything Nader has said . Responding to Vagley 's prediction of upward pressure on rates , Nader said he is convinced that the recent insurance price spiral in California will come to an end even under Gillespie , whom he has criticized as too pro-industry and urged to resign . When rate regulation begins , Nader said , `` there 's no way rates are going to be as high as they would have been without regulation . '' Industry representatives , however , suggested that the costs of regulation by themselves may contribute to higher prices . Nader Paid $ 10,000 Jerry O'Kane , executive director of the agents and brokers association , said Nader was paid $ 10,000 to appear at the convention while Rosenfield and J. Robert Hunter , president of the National Insurance Consumer Organization , were each paid $ 2,500 . Four industry representatives in the debate appeared without charge , he said . In welcoming remarks to the 1,550 delegates , Sen. Pete Wilson ( R-Calif. ) , who plans to be a candidate for governor next year , said a New York-style no-fault insurance plan `` is something that might be looked at in California . '' Under the New York system , lawsuits are sharply curtailed , motorists collect most of their losses from their own insurance companies and there is strict rate regulation . Benefits are quite generous , but the plan has succeeded for the most part in keeping price increases down in New York . Wilson said that , as a lawyer , he believes `` the legal profession is very costly to the consumers of this nation '' and cutting their role in the system would save everyone money . Later , Tom Conneely , president of the Assn . of California Insurance Companies , said most estimates are that installation of a New York-style no-fault in California would result in only a 0 % to 4 % immediate decrease in prices . Its main advantage , he said , would be to stem future price increases .