Accepting the award for most valuable player for leading her team to the national championship -- Jennifer Azzi . Who else ? The hometown girl , who left Oak Ridge , Tenn. , four years ago only to return to nearby Knoxville to finish her career before thousands of cheering fans , scored 17 points , had five assists and grabbed four rebounds in helping Stanford down Auburn , 88-81 . The 5-foot-9 Azzi received a standing ovation from a record national-championship crowd of 16,595 when she fouled out with with 1:28 remaining . Shortly thereafter , she was atop the stand at mid-court in Thompson-Boling arena Sunday with the award in her hand and a national championship ring on her finger . `` I ca n't describe how I feel inside right now . All I know is that it feels really good , '' Azzi said . `` Katy ( Steding ) and I have played four years together , and all in one moment all that hard work has paid off . '' Apparently so . Azzi and fellow seniors Steding and Stacy Parson are credited with leading the transformation of a 5-23 program into a 32-1 national champion . Auburn ( 28-7 ) , with three consecutive unsuccessful tries in the title game , kept up with the Cardinal for 20 minutes . But after coming out of the locker room tied , 41-41 , Stanford 's quickness and teamwork took its toll on Auburn 's defensive press . Center Trisha Stevens put the Cardinal ahead , 48-46 , with a four-foot shot from the lane with 17:32 left , and Stanford eventually built a lead that proved insurmountable . A six-foot hook by the 6-3 Stevens -- who finished with 16 points and 10 rebounds -- put the Cardinal up by six with 14:45 left , and Auburn could get no closer after that . The Tigers came within seven points after a three-point basket by guard Evelyn Thompson with 1:05 left , but she fouled Stanford guard Sonja Henning , who made both free throws to stop the Tigers ' momentum . `` We wanted to attack the middle , and ( Henning ) and ( Azzi ) read the defense and attacked , '' Stanford Coach Tara VanDerveer said . `` We have n't been pressed much all season , but there 's a reason for that -- it opens up the opportunity for the three ( front-line players ) , and we look at it as an opportunity for the fast break . '' Auburn Coach Joe Ciampi 's assesment of Stanford : `` They have so many weapons and defensively they gave us big problems . We anticipated concentrating on ( Trisha ) Stevens , Azzi and Steding to start . . . but you never know . '' That left the floor open to Henning , who scored 21 points and grabbed nine rebounds . `` My disbelief was with how quick they got the shot off , '' Ciampi said . `` We felt we could get back and be in position to get back and contest the shot . They were shooting three-point hots ( as accurately ) as we were layups . '' Stanford shot 42.3 % from three-point range , hitting 11 of 26 . Azzi was four of eight from the three-point line . Steding , who finished with 18 points and five assists , was six of 15 . The Cardinal broke the Auburn press early and forced the Tigers into playing one-on-one . Steding and Azzi , with five three-point shots between them in the first seven minutes , sparked the Cardinal to an 11-point lead , and it appeared a blowout was in progress . But Auburn fought back and took a 28-27 lead with 7:43 left in the first half and widened the margin to 41-32 with 2:05 left . Stanford scored the next nine points to tie the game , 41-41 . And for the next 20 minutes , determination and execution of the Stanford machine proved overwhelming . `` We 're a team in every sense , '' Azzi said . `` And our success comes from within us . '' Asked if she was saddened by never again wearing a Stanford uniform , Azzi responded : `` I feel so good now , at this moment . I 'm sad knowing I 'll never wear a Stanford jersey again , but I 'm glad it paid off . '' VanDerveer : `` When she came out ( after her fifth foul ) I was n't thinking about it . Then it hit me -- I wo n't see Jennifer and ( Parson ) play again . So I 'm happy , but I 'm sad . '' NCAA Women 's Notes Both tournament and single season attendance records were set at the 1990 Final Four . The paid attendance for both games totaled 39,490 , the turnstile count 34,196 . Paid attendance for the 1987 Final Four at Austin , Tex. , totalled 31,230 , and the third all-time high was 18,788 at last year 's tournament at Tacoma , Wash. . . . The all-tournament team for this year 's Final Four included Jennifer Azzi ( MVP ) , Katy Steding of Stanford , Venus Lacy of Louisiana Tech , Chantel Tremitiere of Auburn and Carolyn Jones of Auburn . Stanford 's Sonja Henning did not make the team , despite an outstanding tournament in which she shot 50 % and averaged 12 points and more than seven assists a game . . . . Jones , a 5-6 guard , was high scorer for Auburn with 16 points . The NCAA women 's basketball rules committee has instituted changes for next season : players fouled while attempting a three-point basket will be given three free throws if the basket is missed ; if a goaltending call is made during a free throw , a point will be awarded and the team causing the infraction will be assessed a technical foul ; and in jump-ball situations , the ball will be awarded out of bounds at the spot closest to where the situation occurs . The ball had been awarded at the sideline .