In the end , nearly all disputes are theological . The reasons we give for what we believe are rationalizations we make up after we 've decided . Reason and logic make our beliefs look respectable . Ralph W. Moss is a science writer who has spent 15 years studying cancer research and treatment . He believes that the conventional treatments -- surgery , radiation and chemotherapy -- largely do not work and that unconventional treatments -- Laetrile , diet and vitamins , for example -- are promising approaches that have been dismissed by the medical establishment . The fact that this debate never ends is yet further proof of people 's willingness to believe nonsense ( not that there is any shortage of such evidence ) . Laetrile has been tested . And tested . And tested . And tested . The National Cancer Institute did a major nationwide study in the early 1980s and concluded that Laetrile is `` ineffective as a treatment for cancer . '' Yet the true believers , Moss among them , will not give up . The National Cancer Institute did not use real Laetrile , they say . The study was just a way to discredit Laetrile . `` More laetrile is being used in the late '80s than it was a decade before , '' Moss writes . He seems to think that this demonstrates that Laetrile works rather than recognizing what it does demonstrate : that desperate people will try anything . To be sure , the war on cancer ( like the war on drugs and the war on poverty ) has gotten essentially nowhere . The incidence of cancer continues to increase , and mortality rates remain high . More than a million Americans are diagnosed with cancer yearly , and more than 500,000 die of the disease every year . So far , cancer treatment is not one of orthodox medicine 's success stories . But I do not understand why otherwise sensible people conclude that the answer lies with unorthodox medicine -- particularly when the data show otherwise . Moss argues that the medical establishment suppresses data that does not agree with its view and harasses or jails health-care providers who try to do things differently . `` Scientific theories are suppressed , medical records seized , clinics shut down , and innovative clinicians thrown in prison , '' he writes . But he never adequately explains why this great conspiracy exists or how it is maintained . His book is chockablock with alleged skulduggery by the medical establishment . Does he really believe that doctors do n't want to cure cancer ? That they want to see their patients suffer and die ? That they blindly turn their backs on promising treatments in order to preserve their erroneous view of disease ? Why is it that only a tiny number of doctors ( I 'm sure I 'll hear from them and their adherents ) continue to believe in the claptrap that Moss is spewing ? The great weight of evidence and informed scientific opinion rejects this book out of hand . The Laetrilists , dietitians , vitamin advocates and believers in the power of positive thinking will respond by pointing to Galileo , a single individual who stood up to and defeated the weight of scientific opinion . The majority of scientists can be -- and are -- wrong , they will say . Until effective cures for cancer are found , this dispute can not be resolved . The orthodox view will continue to dismiss alternate treatments as quackery . The unorthodox view will continue to dismiss the medical establishment as narrow-minded dogmatists . As in most disputes , neither side can persuade the other . Moss ' personal history exemplifies the problem . He used to be assistant director of public relations for the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York , a very orthodox institution . But he was fired because of his views about Laetrile . He says he was dismissed because he refused to participate in falsifying evidence . Sloan-Kettering undoubtedly says that his judgment is faulty and that he ceased to be an effective spokesman for cancer research . Take your pick . In this century , medicine has scored tremendous successes in treating and curing communicable diseases -- the first time in history that doctors have actually been able to intervene and help their patients , not just hold their hands . Cancer has proved much more intractable . There is no cancer equivalent to antibiotics . But the approach of orthodox medicine is sound , and it should not be abandoned in the desperate search to find a cure for cancer . Next : Jonathan Kirsch reviews `` The Escape Factory : The Story of MIS-X '' by Lloyd R. Shoemaker ( St. Martin 's Press ) .