The San Diego Cavers had No . 1-ranked Sweetwater right where they wanted it midway through the second quarter . They had the lead ( 28-17 ) , the momentum and appeared to be playing with a ton of confidence . So what happened ? How did San Diego wind up down 10 points with five minutes left in the game and on the wrong end of a 64-54 final ? `` We got tentative and Sweetwater got some momentum , '' San Diego Coach Dennis Kane said . And ? `` We did n't execute our offense and we did n't rebound on the defensive end , he said . '' Sweetwater Coach Dave Ybarra had another explanation for his team 's victory , which earned the Red Devils their first Section final appearance since 1980 , when they won the title . `` We knew sooner or later John ( Gilbert ) was going to hit a three , or Joe ( McDowell ) would get a dunk , or Carlos ( Campbell ) would get going , '' Ybarra said . Sweetwater ( 27-1 ) meets Mt . Carmel -- an easy , 67-46 victor over Patrick Henry -- Friday night ( 8:30 ) at Golden Hall . Ybarra apparently knew something because all three premonitions came true . Gilbert hit a three , Campbell hit a couple jumpers and McDowell hit a follow shot -- his dunk would come later . Just like that , it was a six-point San Diego lead ( 30-24 ) at halftime . Two more Gilbert three-pointers to open the second half and two Melvin Rushing free throws tied the score at 32 . But after San Diego took a 40-37 lead with 2:40 remaining in the third quarter , Sweetwater really turned up the volume . Meanwhile , San Diego went into hibernation , largely because its leading scorer Clark James picked up his fourth foul . Immediately , Sweetwater went on a 6-0 run sparked by Campbell and McDowell . Campbell had a length of the court drive for a layup and McDowell had a steal and his dunk . From there , San Diego closed to one twice , but never took the lead again . the Cavers trailed 48-46 after three quarters and 56-46 after a eight unanswered points by the Red Devils . James , a 6-foot-5 forward came back in the game early in the fourth quarter , but began going one-on-one and forcing his shots . After scoring 23 points in the first three quarters , James missed his last five shots , all long jumpers , and was pulled with 1:40 left and San Diego trailing by 59-49 . `` We got completely out of our offense , '' Kane said . `` They ca n't win with one person , '' McDowell said . `` Our defense is too good for that . '' DAVE McKIBBEN