With a heavily edited version of a key White House tape and museum displays that avoid many aspects of the scandal , including the criminal convictions of several of his senior aides , the new Richard M. Nixon library constitutes the former President 's most recent effort in a 16-year campaign to reshape the public 's view of Watergate . Library officials repeatedly had told reporters in recent days and weeks that the tapes presented at the museum would be left unedited . Asked Friday about that , library director Hugh Hewitt declined to comment . `` That 's a museum-design question , '' he said , adding that the building 's design had been supervised by Nixon 's top aide and spokesman , John Taylor . Taylor could not be reached for comment . The Watergate display , which Nixon avoided when he gave President Bush and former Presidents Reagan and Ford a tour of the rest of his museum Thursday , opened to the public Friday . It consists of three White House tapes , two of which will not be available to visitors until September , and a long wall of text and photographs describing the events of the Watergate scandal . The one tape available to the public now is the so-called `` smoking gun '' tape of July 23 , 1972 , in which Nixon approved a plan to have the CIA warn the FBI to stop its investigation of Watergate . The library version of the tape presents only some portions of the conversation , stitched together with a narration that offers innocent explanations for what Nixon is heard saying . The tape concludes with Nixon reading a diary entry made two weeks later describing later events . The text displays concede that `` Nixon himself has said he made inexcusable misjudgments during Watergate '' but accuse many of Nixon 's critics -- ranging from the late Sen. Sam Ervin ( D-N.C. ) , who chaired the Senate 's investigation of Watergate , to Archibald Cox , the Harvard law professor who served as special prosecutor until Nixon fired him -- of `` partisan '' bias . Washington Post reporter Bob Woodward and his former colleague Carl Bernstein are singled out for special criticism . One display accuses the two , who won a Pulitzer Prize for their reporting on Watergate , of `` offering bribes , illegally gaining access to telephone numbers and talking to members of the grand jury '' in their efforts . The display puts that accusation in quotes attributed only to an unnamed `` scholar . '' The quotation is from a recent book on Watergate by Stanley I. Kutler of the University of Wisconsin . Kutler , in an interview Friday , said that in the book he did not make the charge himself , but merely had noted that others had said it . Woodward , in an interview Friday , denied ever having offered bribes . Kutler said : `` Nixon is blaming the media and everyone else for his troubles while Watergate was his own doing and that of his aides . The media simply reported the investigations of properly constituted legal authorities . '' As portrayed in thousands of pages of transcripts from court trials and congressional hearings , hundreds of hours of taped White House conversations and depositions from scores of witnesses , the scandal which became known as `` Watergate '' was , in fact , two overlapping conspiracies . The first , begun early in the Nixon term , was a plan to use wiretaps , burglaries and surveillance by the FBI , the CIA and independent groups organized by White House aides to harass , spy on and punish the President 's enemies . Members of one of those independent groups , known informally as `` the plumbers , '' were arrested on June 17 , 1972 , as they tried to break into the offices of the Democratic national chairman Lawrence O'Brien in Washington 's Watergate office building . Before the scandal ended , John D. Ehrlichman , Nixon 's top domestic policy adviser , G. Gordon Liddy , the general counsel to Nixon 's reelection campaign and eight others were found guilty of criminal acts connected to that conspiracy . The museum contains no mention of that first conspiracy or the convictions that flowed from it . The second conspiracy , which began almost immediately after the Watergate arrests , was designed to cover up the first conspiracy . Ehrlichman , H.R . Haldeman , who was Nixon 's chief of staff , Atty . Gen. John N. Mitchell and eight others were found guilty of criminal acts in connection with that conspiracy . Nixon 's own participation in the cover-up effort led the Watergate grand jury to name him a `` unindicted co-conspirator '' on Feb. 29 , 1974 , and formed the basis for most of the impeachment charges that the House Judiciary Committee approved , 27-11 , on July 27 , 1974 . Related charges involving illegal campaign contributions , tax law violations and political `` dirty tricks '' led to guilty pleas or convictions for 50 other individuals and corporations . As portrayed by the museum 's display , the scandal that drove Nixon from office is far different , the way the former President has always seen it : `` an epic and bloody political battle '' in which Democrats sought to reverse the `` mandate of the 1972 election '' by forcing him from office . Visitors to the museum first hear of Watergate during a 27-minute film that portrays highlights of Nixon 's career . The mention is brief . `` The President knew nothing about it , '' a narrator says , referring to the Watergate break-in . But , the narrator continues , in the months that followed , `` some of his aides '' became involved in a `` cover-up . '' The film then leaves the subject entirely , returning only to say , without further explanation , that `` threatened with impeachment , '' Nixon resigned . The Watergate room itself presents a carefully selected set of facts about the scandal . Nixon , the opening display says , `` did not pay much attention to '' the break-in when he first heard of it the next day . That display does not mention the fact that Nixon and Haldeman met and discussed the break-in for 20 minutes two days later . The tape of that July 20 discussion was mysteriously erased -- the notorious 18 1/2-minute gap that became one of Watergate 's most notorious incidents . According to the museum display , which mentions the gap but does not explain which conversation it involved , `` experts said the gap could easily have been caused by a mechanical malfunction , but the President 's opponents wasted no time in finding sinister and devious motives . '' In fact , a team of experts appointed by federal District Judge John J. Sirica reported on June 4 that the tape had been erased by hand and that `` malfunctioning of the recorder '' is `` conclusively eliminated '' as a possible cause of the erasures .