Researchers said Thursday that they had isolated a human protein that in the laboratory was found to stop the growth of breast cancer cells without affecting other types of human cells . The scientists said the discovery may mark a significant advance in the search for a breast cancer treatment and may ultimately help lead to a strategy for prevention of the malignancy , which now strikes one American woman in 10 . A team of University of Michigan scientists led by Dr. Max S. Wicha , writing in Friday 's Science magazine , said it had isolated a human protein that it believes plays a key role in the body 's own system for controlling cell growth . The team has dubbed the protein mammastatin and is now trying to produce it in sufficient quantities to test it in laboratory animals and ultimately in humans , Wicha said in a telephone interview . `` Mammastatin , which is produced by normal breast cells , is a potent inhibitor of breast cancer cells growing in the laboratory , '' Wicha said . `` It specifically stops the growth of breast cancer cells but not cells from other tissues . '' Wicha said he and his colleagues were now using genetic engineering techniques to try to clone the human gene responsible for producing the protein . Achieving this would enable them to make relatively large amounts of the compound in the laboratory , but it may take several years to accomplish this , he said . About 142,000 American women will be diagnosed with breast cancer and an estimated 43,000 will die of the disease this year , according to the American Cancer Society . In normal breast tissue , cell growth appears to be controlled by a balance between growth inhibitors and growth stimulators , the researchers said . In cancerous tissues , abnormal cell growth may occur because a stimulator overpowers its inhibitor , creating an imbalance , they said . The scientists said they had developed a test to measure mammastatin in blood and found it to be present in all women , though at widely varying levels .