Arnold Beckman celebrated his Big Nine-O with 1,000 of his faithful employees at the Disneyland Hotel on Tuesday night . And what did he do ? Partied with the stamina of a 30-year-old , shaking hands here , flashing smiles there , dipping into filet mignon and birthday cake with gusto . How did the founder and chairman-emeritus of Beckman Instruments , Inc. feel ? `` Great ! Like I did at 89 ! '' said the nonagenarian with a laugh , striding into a special champagne reception for employees who were celebrating their 10th , 15th , 20th and 25th anniversaries with his company . `` Really . I am so grateful to be 90 and in good health . '' The annual splash may be Orange County 's oldest gala . The event marked the 55th year that Beckman Instruments of Fullerton honored its true-blues with a recognition dinner . In the hotel 's South Lounge , employees tipped bubbly and talked about their boss as they awaited his arrival . `` He is the finest man I 've ever known , '' said Allan Chisholm , a Beckman employee for 25 years . `` I wish him another 20 years ! He is the kind of man who , if he does n't know your name the first time around , he 'll know it the second . '' Charlie Vice wished there were more people in the world like Beckman , an inventor inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame two years ago . `` Very few people leave a mark . And Beckman has already left several . '' Among them : the pH meter , a device that measures acidity and alkalinity ; the spectrophotometer , which measures light ; and the helipot , used during World War II for radar control . `` I mean , '' Vice added , `` 100 years from now , who 's going to remember Charlie Vice ? Probably nobody ! '' Party hats and streamers covered the tables . And so did programs listing each long-term employee 's name . `` Is n't this great ? '' said Molly Moodyman , another 25-year employee . `` I love to work at Beckman because it 's so pleasant . The people are so wonderful . '' And you can make good money at Beckman , Moodyman said . `` If you stick it out , you can get what you want . '' In his closing remarks , Beckman , dapper in a dark blue suit and burgundy tie , told the crowd : `` I hope to be back at the end of the decade and see how well you have carried out your obligations . '' Beckman will be honored at another bash later this month when Gavin and Ninetta Herbert stage a luncheon for 200 guests at their Casa Pacifica manse , once Richard M. Nixon 's Western White House . Hi ho silver ! : The cubed lamb with ginger and garlic delighted guests at Sunday night 's `` International Dinner , '' staged by the Protocol Foundation of Orange County . So did the cubed chicken whipped up with tomatoes and spices . And the tandoori bread . But it was the Royal Khyber 's `` Gulab Jaman '' dessert that got guests gabbing . The deep-fried milk ball floating in sugar syrup was frosted with sterling silver paper . `` Hmmmmm , good for your health , '' said the Hon . S. K. Lambah , consul general for India , dipping into the shiny concoction . `` It 's an aphrodisiac , '' whispered restaurant owner Arun Puri , wearing an elegant black achkan , the stand-up collar jacket popularized by Nehru . About 100 guests came ( at an ultra-reasonable $ 35 each ) to dabble in Indian food , raise money for the Protocol Foundation and listen to Lambah talk about his country . `` We are an ancient country , '' he said , standing between flags of India and the United States . `` But we have had a functioning democracy for 40 years . ( George Bernard ) Shaw said the United States and Britain were two countries separated by the same language . In a light vein , I would say the United States and India are two countries separated by the same political system . '' Additional points made by Lambah : * The United States is India 's largest trading partner . * India was the 10th country in the world to become industrialized . * After the United States and the Soviet Union , India is the world 's largest resource for technological manpower . And of course , India has the Taj Mahal . During dinner , Lambah was asked what he thought of Donald Trump 's new gambling casino by the same name . Lambah smiled . `` There is hardly a comparison , '' he said . `` The real Taj Mahal was built to symbolize a man 's enduring love for his wife , '' said Lambah 's guest , Devender Singh of the India Embassy in Washington . Also among guests : Fred and Eva Schneider , vice president of the foundation ; Wes and Mary Jones , the foundation 's executive director ; and board members Anne Badham with husband Bob ; Annemarie Ballin with husband , Dolf ; Bernice and Willard Hird ; Pat and Carl Neisser ; John and Kitty Rau and Elaine and Bill Redfield .