QUESTION : I want to install residential window film myself to block the sun 's heat and stop the fading of my curtains and furniture . What type of window film is best so the sun 's heat is n't blocked in the winter too ? ANSWER : Installing window film yourself is one of the best methods to control the summer sun 's heat and glare . It lowers your air-conditioning costs and improves your comfort . An added benefit is that it blocks nearly all the ultraviolet rays , so it protects your curtains and furniture from fading . There are many types of window film available and each has its specific sun-control characteristics . Generally , the ones that block the most solar heat in the summer , also block it in the winter . With proper cleaning , window film should last 10 years or more . There is a special type of residential `` insulating '' window film that uses a low-E ( low emissivity ) coating . This low-E coating is the same type of coating that is used on the new super-energy-efficient thermal replacement windows . It is as effective at blocking the sun 's direct heat as ordinary window film and better at blocking reflected heat from patios and walks . Although insulating film does block some of the sun 's heat in the winter , it also reduces the heat loss back outdoors . Overall , energy is saved and your heating bills are lower too . Even if you are n't concerned about stopping the summer sun 's heat , insulating window film is often a good idea . In addition to the winter energy savings and stopping fabric fading , it increases the shatter resistance of window glass . This is important for children 's safety . Residential insulating window film is available in several degrees of tint . After installation , you generally wo n't even notice the lighter-tinted film on your windows . There are also more reflective insulating window films available that block even more summer heat . It is easy to install insulating window film yourself . Cut the window film with scissors about 1 inch larger than the window glass area . Using a spray bottle , wet the indoor surface of the window with water . Peel off the backing , wet film 's adhesive surface and place it against the glass . Position the film on the glass and squeegee it to force out the excess water . Cut the excess film overlap with a razor blade and let it dry . You can write to me for Utility Bills Update No . 331 for a small sample piece of low-E insulating window film to try on your window , heat-blocking and performance specifications , addresses of manufacturers and do-it-yourself instructions and diagrams . Please include $ 1 and a self-addressed envelope.Fan No Replacement for Air Conditioner Q : I was going to install a whole-house fan in our new home along with central air-conditioning . Will installing a whole-house fan reduce the size of the air conditioner that I need ? A : A whole-house fan ( which draws fresh air from the windows and exhausts it through the attic by way of an opening in the ceiling ) can reduce your air-conditioning costs and make you more comfortable , but it wo n't reduce the size of air conditioner you need . An air conditioner is sized to meet the cooling needs for the hottest times of the day when you would n't be using your whole house fan anyway . Use the whole-house fan at night and early morning . It will keep the house cool well into the late-morning hours . However , during hot and humid weather , you may be better off not alternating the use of a whole-house fan and air conditioner each day . Too much moisture is absorbed by the house at night and your air conditioner may run longer to remove it the next day . Letters and questions to Dulley , a Cincinnati-based engineering consultant , may be sent to James Dulley , Los Angeles Times , 6906 Royalgreen Drive , Cincinnati , Ohio 45244 .