Richard M. Nixon and the `` vivacious young woman with titian hair '' he met at a theater audition in Whittier celebrated their 50th wedding anniversary today surrounded by their children and grandchildren . Nixon and his wife , Pat , allowed a photographer and a reporter a rare glimpse into their home life in a woodsy setting an hour 's drive from New York City . The Nixons ' two grandsons and two granddaughters cavorted while an Associated Press photographer took the grandparents ' anniversary picture . A few minutes later two of the children were in bathing suits and splashing in the pool . The Nixons seldom go out in public , and they allowed this visit only on ground rules that their remarks not be published . They usually celebrate special occasions with only their immediate family , which includes Edward and Tricia Cox and David and Julie Eisenhower . The Eisenhowers have three children ; the Coxes one . Pat Nixon , who has stayed out of public view since the former President left the White House in disgrace in 1974 , wore a pink and white Adele Simpson suit for the anniversary portrait . Her daughters said the suit was a favorite from the White House years . Despite a major stroke in 1976 and another stroke in 1983 , Mrs. Nixon looked well . The former President and his wife live in a home surrounded by tall trees that obscure the house from the road . The four-acre grounds include a swimming pool and tennis court . But they will move soon to a townhouse in Park Ridge , about a mile away . The Nixons met in 1938 at the casting tryouts for `` The Dark Tower , '' a play by George S. Kaufman and Alexander Wollcott . `` For me it was a case of love at first sight , '' Nixon wrote in his memoirs . `` I got a friend to introduce us and then offered them both a ride home . On the way I asked Pat if she would like a date with me . She said , ' I 'm very busy . ' I said , 'You should n't say that because someday I 'm going to marry you . ' `` '' I thought I knew everyone in Whittier , but that night a beautiful and vivacious young woman with titian hair appeared whom I had never seen before , '' Nixon describes their meeting . `` I found I could not take my eyes away from her . '' Nixon , then a young partner in the law firm of Wingert , Bewley and Nixon , married Pat Ryan on June 21 , 1940 , at the Mission Inn in Riverside . At the time she met Nixon , the future First Lady was teaching business courses at Whittier High School for $ 190 a month .