Angel busybody Devon White had one of those rare nights when he did n't know whether to cherish or forget his contributions to a 4-3 victory over the Kansas City Royals at Anaheim Stadium Saturday . On the cherish side were White 's three hits -- two singles and a double -- which helped push his average up to .299 . He scored once . He flustered Royal starter Charlie Leibrandt into heaving a pickoff throw into foul territory . He stole a base , his 21st in a young season . All in all , a perfectly wonderful evening until you recount White 's pair of mid-game adventures . For starters , he was caught stealing after one of those singles . Later , White tried snaring a sinking line drive off the grass blades . He missed and two Royal runs scored to tie the game . So what to do : applaud or sadly shake your head ? Probably applaud ; the Angels did . Without White they would n't have had at least one of those four runs . The circumstances : White singled between third and shortstop to begin the third inning . With 20 stolen bases already to White 's credit , Leibrandt was obliged to keep an eye on him at first . So he did , lobbing ball after ball to first baseman Pat Tabler , all in hopes of keeping White put . It nearly worked . White had cut his lead down slightly when Leibrandt unleashed another throw in the general direction of Tabler . But this time Tabler was shielded by White and the ball whizzed past his glove and into foul territory . Meanwhile , White motored all the way to third base and later scored easily on Wally Joyner 's single . White was back at first in the fourth inning , too , courtesy of another ground ball single that scooted past shortstop Kurt Stillwell . This time he took his lead and was off as Leibrandt apparently began his motion toward home . But wait . Leibrandt instead threw to Tabler at first , who threw to second in time to catch a surprised White . `` It 's a balk , '' White said of Leibrandt 's move . `` I still think it 's a balk . His motion was going toward the plate . '' If it was , none of the four umpires objected . In the scorebook , White 's attempt simply went down as a caught stealing . With two outs in the sixth , White was again the center of attention . With Kevin Seitzer on second and the fleet-footed Bo Jackson on first , Tabler hit a line drive toward mid-center field . White charged . `` I went after that ball because I thought we could get out of the inning , '' he said . `` I thought I ( had it ) , but then the ball really dipped . '' A possible out suddenly became a sure-fire double as the ball bounced in front of White and then off his glove toward right field . Dante Bichette retrieved the ball and threw toward home , but not in time to get Jackson . `` I knew ( Jackson ) was going , no doubt , '' Bichette said . The throw made it as far as Wally Joyner , who then relayed it to catcher Lance Parrish . Too late . `` A regular human being would n't have scored , '' White said in admiration of Jackson 's speed . Then again , said Bichette , a regular human being would n't have come close to Tabler 's line drive in the first place . `` If anybody could have caught it , Devo could have , '' he said .