It was a moment some had spent more than a decade waiting to see : Richard M. Nixon standing once again behind the royal blue presidential seal , beaming widely as thousands of friends and admirers cheered . `` He 's meant a lot to some of us who are older , '' said Margaret Chambers , 72 , of Fullerton . `` I used to work for him in Garden Grove going door to door . '' Lupe Westrup , an English teacher at a private school in Brea , also watched with history on her mind as the former President , arms at his sides , took the lectern and gratefully acknowledged a long ovation . In the presidential election of 1960 , Westrup said , she was one of the only people in her neighborhood who backed Nixon against John F. Kennedy . `` They stoned my house , they punctured my tires and they egged my house , '' she said . `` Today , 30 years later , made it worthwhile . '' Though Nixon loyalists dominated Thursday 's crowd , they did not own it . Others braved long lines and the sweltering heat just for the chance to see the rare gathering of four Presidents on a single stage , and a few took advantage of the occasion to air their political grievances . There were visitors who traveled thousands of miles to see the ceremony and visitors who camped overnight to secure prime seats . Once inside the library compound , everybody had to wait in line for up to an hour to shuffle through a security check that included metal detectors . Still , few seemed to leave disappointed . `` You 'll never see four Presidents all together like this , '' said Pat Yates , a Tustin resident . `` It 's history in the making . '' Thursday 's crowd of 50,000 was overwhelmingly supportive of Nixon and his fellow Republicans , but pockets of protesters were sprinkled throughout . The demonstrators -- whose causes ranged from AIDS to abortion rights , from the environment to Central America -- clashed with Nixon backers in a few places , exchanging harsh words but stopping short of blows . Although tempers occasionally flared and temperatures hit 90 degrees , Yorba Linda absorbed the huge crowd -- more visitors than had ever descended on the city in a single day , local leaders figured -- and handled it without serious incident . `` It 's all gone very smoothly from our perspective , '' said Brea Police Lt. Chester Panique . `` It was hot , but so far we 've just had a couple of minor incidents and no arrests . '' During the speeches , while some visitors scambled up bleachers and flagpoles for a better look , children waded barefoot into the library fountain and the reflecting pool behind the library to take the edge off the heat . Dignitaries decked out in suits and silk dresses rolled up their sleeves and spent the morning fanning themselves with white programs . The sun was a little easier to take for the Presidents and First Ladies , whose stage included several air conditioners that occasionally blew a few wisps of hair out of place . Michael Steinkraus , a Red Cross emergency medical technician in charge of a first-aid tent behind the bleachers , on Thursday afternoon wearily tended to heat-stricken visitors who lay on cots or paused in the shade to sit on chairs and tables . `` It 's been like this all day , '' Steinkraus said , adding that Red Cross workers had treated at least 100 people for minor heat exhaustion . Two -- a pregnant woman and an elderly woman -- were sent to the hospital . `` The biggest problem is that they ( the dedication organizers ) did n't provide enough water for people to drink , '' he said . `` There were a lot of people here today , and unfortunately , we ca n't supply water to 100,000 people . '' Police estimates ran lower than that , but the heat was made all the more oppressive by the huge number of visitors who attended Thursday 's dedication . Brea police , who handle Yorba Linda 's law enforcement duties , said the line of people trying to get into the event at one point stretched for two miles . Almost 40,000 visitors passed through the metal detectors , and police estimated that another 10,000 people came to town , took a look at the crowd and headed home . That created long lines of traffic , as well as boom-town business for area merchants , some of whom had decorated their establishments for the occasion . Residents near the line outside the library sold muffins , rolls and orange juice , while area stores rented out parking spaces for as much as $ 20 each . By early afternoon the streets were returning to normal and nearly all of the visitors had worked their way out of the city . On the way , many stopped long enough to scoop up Nixon T-shirts , hats , buttons and other memorabilia from vendors . Orange County Supervisor Gaddi H. Vasquez , a longtime Nixon admirer whose 1988 speech at the Republican National Convention won high praise from the former President , picked his way back to his office Thursday afternoon and glowingly pronounced the day a historic success . `` This was really magnificent , '' said Vasquez , who brought his 11-year-old son to Thursday 's event so the youngster could see Nixon in person . `` To see the twinkle in President Nixon 's eye as he scanned the crowd . . . . There 's no words to describe it . '' Staff writers Sonni Efron , Ted Johnson , Eric Lichtblau , Maria Newman and David Reyes contributed to this report .