Comparing Richard M. Nixon to King David and Abraham Lincoln , the Rev . Billy Graham on Wednesday said Nixon is not a `` tragic figure '' but a leader whose failings and defeats were greatly magnified by the glare of television cameras . In an interview with The Times , the worldwide evangelist said he is still baffled by the Watergate controversy that forced the resignation of his longtime friend and golfing buddy 16 years ago . He predicted that future historians will not consider Watergate a constitutional crisis as Nixon 's foes did in 1974 . `` The only thing that bothered me about the whole thing was the language that he used on the tapes , '' Graham said , referring to transcripts of secretly recorded conversations in the Oval Office . The tapes provided what some considered evidence of Nixon 's attempt to cover up the Watergate break-in and revealed the former President 's use of profanity . The phrase `` expletive deleted '' -- substituted for profanity by transcribers of the tapes -- became a popular joke throughout the country . `` I did n't know and none of his close friends ever knew that he even knew some of those words , '' Graham said . `` I feel it was n't the real Nixon . And , of course , I believe in supernatural powers , of both good and evil , and I think some of these were at work at the time . '' Such struggles are not unusual for national leaders , said Graham , who flew to Southern California to offer the dedicatory prayer at the Richard M. Nixon Library and Birthplace today in Yorba Linda . He said he considered the opening of the library to be the pinnacle of Nixon 's career and a manifestation that most of the American people have forgiven the once-disgraced leader . `` Throughout the history of Israel , the leaders of Judah and Israel were always up and down , '' he said . Yet none of the Old Testament patriarchs or Lincoln were , like Nixon , forced to contend with a relentless press corps that broadcasted political problems and personal failings , he said . `` Look at David , '' Graham said of the biblical hero who slew the giant Goliath . `` He had to run and hide . And then he committed a murder and he committed adultery , which was abhorrent to God . But God forgave David and David is considered one of the greatest kings that ever lived in the history of Judaism . `` If we would have had the cameras on David in those days , they might have rebelled against him . We would have had black headlines . '' After 16 years , Graham said , the American public is still confused about what drove Nixon from office . `` I have read a lot about Watergate , but I still do n't understand it , '' Graham said . `` I do n't understand why it became such a big thing , and neither do the people around the world . '' Graham first met Nixon in 1950 , when the then-California congressman asked the evangelist to join him for a game of golf . Over the years , Graham said , the friendship grew to the point where he gave the invocation at Nixon 's inauguration , held private White House church services during the Vietnam War and gave the eulogy for Nixon 's mother , Hannah . Despite the friendship , the dark days of Watergate resulted in a breach in the relationship , Graham said . Nixon steadfastly refused to take his calls or to see him , even when he flew to Washington three days before the former President resigned . Nixon continued to refuse his calls in the ensuing months , when he lay near death in a San Clemente hospital after a bout of phlebitis . `` My wife rented an airplane , and it had a sign on it , 'Nixon : God loves you and so do we , ' and flew it back and forth in front of the hospital , '' Graham said . About six months after Nixon left office , Graham said , the former President unexpectedly called and invited him for a visit in San Clemente . `` It was just a natural evening , '' Graham said . `` He 's a man that can rebound very fast from defeats and problems like that . I think he took it in its historical stride . ''