Gold prices rose sharply Thursday in response to the invasion of Kuwait but closed well below trading peaks reached early in the day . Gold for current delivery soared above $ 385 an ounce in early trading but ended the session at $ 376.80 , up $ 3.50 , on New York 's Commodity Exchange . Precious metals analysts said the initial dramatic price run-up was mainly because of hasty `` short covering '' by speculators who , until the invasion news , had expected the price of gold to drop . Ian C. MacDonald , manager of the Precious Metals Corporate Advisory of Credit Suisse in New York , said : `` There was terrific short covering overnight , '' referring to Wednesday night and early Thursday morning Pacific time . Later in the day , however , profit taking set in , and mining companies stepped in to sell gold and take advantage of the higher price , helping to drive prices back down . Precious metals such as gold are often considered a safe haven in times of crisis . Gold prices typically rise when world tensions escalate . In London , gold rose to $ 378.75 an ounce from $ 374.30 late Wednesday . The precious metal rose in Zurich to $ 379 from $ 371.50 late Tuesday . ( The Zurich market was closed Wednesday because of a holiday . ) Earlier , gold in Hong Kong rose $ 7.93 to close at $ 379.39 . MacDonald predicted that the gold market may be erratic , reacting to news developments in the Middle East . `` This market will certainly be news- or rumor-driven for the next several days , '' he said . Jeffrey A. Nichols , president of American Precious Metals Advisors , said he expects the price of gold in coming months to rise , especially if the U.S. dollar weakens . He said demand for gold is unusually high now , mainly because of exceptionally strong sales of jewelry worldwide . Supplies also have been tight , in part because South African production has fallen and Soviet sales of gold have been lower . John H. O'Connell , senior metals analyst at Refco Inc. , a major commodities brokerage , said the determining factor in gold price movements will be whether the dollar weakens . He said price increases are likely to be gradual , `` not driven by runaway enthusiasm . ''