Nathan ( Nat ) Levine , who parlayed a career as a distributor of early films that were rejected by most of the major studios into the presidency of Republic Pictures , is dead at age 89 . A spokeswoman for the Motion Picture and Television Hospital said Friday that he died Sunday at the Woodland Hills facility . Levine began in the industry in 1920 when he launched an independent distributorship . Seven years later , still in his 20s , Levine formed his own production company , Mascot . First Sound Adventure Short There he produced the first of what would be 500 reels of serials , including what is believed to be the first sound adventure short , `` King of the Congo . '' Meanwhile , Herbert J. Yates , who owned Republic Film Laboratories and later Consolidated Film Industries , was processing film for Mascot , Monogram , Liberty and other small picture companies and knew that Mascot was one of the few independent firms making money . Levine was operating out of the old Mack Sennett studio in North Hollywood , which he purchased when Sennett went bankrupt . An additional attraction for Yates , who wanted his own studio , was that Mascot held contracts for such young cowboy stars as Gene Autry and Smiley Burnette and had used a former USC football player named John Wayne in three short films . In 1935 , Yates formed Republic Pictures and Levine melded Mascot Pictures into the Republic organization . Yates added modern recording equipment and the latest in sound stages to Levine 's holdings . Levine also brought to Republic the sound recording engineers , writers , cinematographers and special effects team that had made Mascot successful . Head of Firm After some disputes with Yates ' original management team , Levine became head of the firm , bringing to the new studio his expertise in low-budget , commercially successful `` B '' features and long-running adventure serials . That twin package remained the backbone of Republic until it gradually quit production in the late 1940s , the victim of expensive , color spectacular movies from competing studios and the brash infant of television . Ironically , CBS purchased the North Hollywood property in 1952 and renamed it Television City . By then Levine had been gone for years , retiring from the film industry in 1937 . His survivors include a son .