Pollsters began asking northeast San Fernando Valley residents a series of carefully crafted questions this week in hopes of painting a detailed picture of alcohol use in an area that authorities say has experienced an excessive number of alcohol-related problems . The Pacoima-based Northeast Valley Health Corp. received a $ 100,000 federal grant to conduct the alcohol study , which also will analyze drunk driving arrests and map sites where alcohol is purchased or consumed publicly . The agency last week began training volunteers to conduct a telephone poll of 1,600 households in Pacoima and the city of San Fernando in English and Spanish . From the initial group contacted , 400 respondents will be asked to take part in lengthier , in-person interviews at their homes . `` It 's designed to find out attitudes , behavior and knowledge related to alcohol use and alcohol-related problems , '' said Marylou Bivian , the agency 's research project director . Xavier Flores , who directs the agency 's community prevention and recovery program , said he is sensitive to concerns that alcohol problems , which exist citywide , are being more closely scrutinized in the two heavily Latino communities . `` I actually believe this area is being singled out for concentrated enforcement by the Police Department , and I do n't like that , '' Flores said . But Flores added that statistics indicate the communities in the northeast Valley do have more drunk driving accidents and other alcohol-related problems than many other parts of the city . Even if the area is being targeted unfairly by police , Flores said , `` there is enough to suggest that we have a big problem '' with alcohol abuse . Last month the Los Angeles Police Department 's Foothill Division , which includes the Pacoima area , led the Valley with 35 drunk driving accidents , said Sharyn Gunter , a Police Department analyst . During 1989 , the Foothill Division 's 313 drunk driving accidents were topped only by the West Valley Division , which recorded 314 . Foothill Division had 2,530 adult drunk driving arrests , including incidents in which no collision occurred , in the first 11 months of 1989 , second only to the Van Nuys Division . Concerned about alcohol-related problems , city officials in recent months have tried to close or curtail sales at Pacoima-area bars and liquor stores , which they claim have contributed to drinking problems . The new survey is expected to help determine whether cultural factors , unfamiliarity with drinking laws and job stress are linked to the community 's drinking problems . `` It 's not racist , '' Juana Mora of UCLA 's Chicano Studies Research Center said of the survey . `` I do n't want to perpetuate stereotypes , but I think the Latinos , for whatever reasons , are drinking more heavily , especially the male population . '' Mora said she has researched Latino drinking patterns for the past 10 years . She reviewed Northeast Valley Health Corp. 's grant application for the alcohol study while employed by the Los Angeles County Office of Alcohol Programs . `` The reason why I recommended it for funding is that it has strong policy implications , '' Mora said . `` It can be used to help public officials reduce the availability of alcohol in that community . `` We do have some research that shows that if you reduce the availability , you can reduce the consumption , even more than education programs would . Information does n't necessarily change behavior . But if you impact the environment , that does tend to change behavior . '' Mora said that people , when surveyed , typically under-report the amount of drinking they do , and pollsters take that into account . Project coordinator Bivian said survey questions were designed to ask respondents about general problems in their community before alcohol issues are addressed , usually in an indirect manner . Researchers hope to find out whether alcohol abuse is more prevalent among adults living alone or with a family , among newcomers or longtime residents , among bilingual Latinos or those who speak only Spanish . Researchers also will look for ties between alcohol use and health ailments or domestic problems such as spousal or child abuse , even though the respondents might not always admit to experiencing such difficulties . After the study is completed in June , health agency members plan to distribute the findings to public officials and to use them to develop new prevention programs . The Northeast Valley Health Corp. , funded by county , state and federal grants , serves about 20,000 primarily low-income residents each month . Community leaders are also awaiting results of the study . `` I think the information is going to be valuable to affirm certain concerns we have , '' said Everto Ruiz , a lifelong San Fernando resident and a member of the Latino Coalition on Alcohol Issues of the San Fernando Valley . Ruiz , who is acting Chicano studies department chairman at Cal State Northridge , said the results might help leaders curb widespread outdoor advertising for alcoholic beverages in the northeast Valley . `` I do n't think it 's enough to hope and pray that everybody 's going to live without destructive practices , '' he said . `` We have to try to have a community that does n't tolerate marketing practices that take advantage of people or are overwhelming in directing people toward negative ways of life . ''