James Gray of Texas Tech did not have much problem with Arizona 's imposing defensive line Saturday night . Gray , a senior , scored two touchdowns and rushed for 224 yards as Texas Tech upset 20th-ranked Arizona , 24-14 , at Lubbock , Tex . Backup tailback Anthony Lynn provided the game-clinching touchdown from three yards out with 8:11 left as the Red Raiders overcame a 7-0 deficit to win . Arizona ( 1-1 ) opened its season last week with a 19-3 victory over Stanford in a Pacific 10 Conference game . Gray turned in the second-best rushing performance in Texas Tech history . Texas Tech ( 1-0 ) gained 367 yards rushing , its best total since 1986 . `` I think Arizona went into this game not worried about our offensive line and me , '' Gray said . `` And I think we changed their minds . '' Said Coach Spike Dykes : `` We just gave James the ball over and over and he responded . '' The Red Raiders scored twice in a 51-second span in the second quarter to take a 14-7 halftime lead . Arizona scored first on quarterback Ron Veal 's one-yard run early in the second quarter . Veal set up the score with passes of 21 and 19 yards . But Gray led Texas Tech with a 26-yard scoring run to cap an 80-yard drive with 3:06 to play in the half . Texas Tech defensive end Marcus Washington recovered David Eldridge 's fumble at the Wildcat 23 , and Gray scored two plays later on a 14-yard run , bringing his school-record career touchdown total to 34 . Gray gained 163 yards in 21 carries during the first half . Arizona Coach Dick Tomey said the Wildcats knew what was coming , but could n't stop Gray . `` Gray was good but so was their entire team , '' Tomey said . `` We were simply outplayed . '' Arizona linebacker Chris Singleton said : `` Gray is a great running back . One tackler ca n't stop him . And their offensive line really did a good job . '' Texas Tech offensive coordinator Dick Winder said it did n't take a genius to figure out Tech 's game plan . `` James is a big horse and we 're going to ride him , '' Winder said . In the first half , Texas Tech drives that stalled at the Arizona 29- , 17- , 26- and 10-yard lines failed to produce points . Arizona 's Mario Hampton tied the game , 14-14 , with a two-yard scoring run in the third period but Elliott 's 29-yard field goal , set up by Gray 's 20-yard run , gave Tech the lead in the fourth quarter .