A massive electronic network linking more than 60,000 computers remains vulnerable to potentially crippling attack by computer `` viruses , '' the General Accounting Office said Thursday . The GAO , an investigative arm of Congress , said the White House science adviser should oversee efforts to help protect the network , Internet , from sabotage . In a report , the agency said lax security procedures on Internet contributed to the severity of problems that resulted when a software virus `` infected '' the system last November , crippling thousands of computers . Internet , the main computer network used by the U.S. research community , is composed of more than 500 national , regional and local networks nationwide and overseas handling unclassified information . Two of the largest component networks are sponsored by the Pentagon 's Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and the National Science Foundation . The GAO report was released at a hearing of the House Energy and Commerce subcommittee on telecommunications and finance . Jack L. Brock Jr. , director of the GAO 's government information and financial management division , told the panel that since the virus attack last fall , security has been strengthened on many computers connected to Internet . However , `` we still feel that the lack of central control ( over security ) . . . remains a problem , '' he testified . Rep. Edward J. Markey ( D-Mass . ) , chairman of the subcommittee , asked Brock whether Internet was still vulnerable to computer viruses and other types of software sabotage . The GAO official responded : `` Sure . . . . No open system can ever be completely secure . '' Computer viruses are generally small strings of computer codes that can infiltrate software programs and replicate themselves thousands of times , causing computer systems to `` crash . '' In some cases , they can surreptitiously alter or destroy computer data . Also testifying at the hearing was John Landry , appearing on behalf of ADAPSO , the Computer Software and Services Industry Assn .