The so-called Big Three -- Marc Girardelli , Pirmin Zurbriggen and Alberto Tomba -- went head-to-head on Vail Mountain Thursday in a giant slalom that was also one of the last stops on Ingemar Stenmark 's farewell tour . None of them , however , could head off blond , wiry Rudolf Nierlich , who gave Austria its second gold medal of the World Alpine Ski Championships . Zurbriggen , who won this event in the 1987 championships on home snow at Crans-Montana , Switzerland , managed to escape with the bronze , just behind Nierlich 's roommate , Helmut Mayer . As for the others , Girardelli finished fourth ; Stenmark came in sixth , and Tomba , the 1988 Olympic giant slalom gold medalist , wound up seventh after bouncing up from a near-spill in the first run . So , Zurbriggen , who was second in Wednesday 's super-G race , Tomba and Stenmark have just one more shot left at a gold medal , in the slalom on Sunday . Of course , Nierlich will be in that race , too , and his rise to prominence here is not really a surprise , since he has won two World Cup races this season -- a giant slalom at Kirchberg , Austria , and a slalom at Wengen , Switzerland . Karl Schranz , Austria 's two-time World Cup champion in 1969-70 , said , `` Nierlich is one of the new skiers . His skis do n't chatter or slide from side to side . He just gets on and off his edges with very little wasted effort . When you watch him race , he does n't look like he 's going very fast , but he is . '' Nierlich , who will turn 23 later this month , was indeed very fast in the first run , almost a full second ahead of the field in 1:17.07 . In the second run , Mayer was quickest , in 1:20.14 , but despite a problem near the middle of the course , Nierlich was only 0.45 seconds slower and ended up getting the gold by a 1.62-second margin with a total time of 2:37.66 . Zurbriggen was another 0.10 back . `` I had a great lead , '' Nierlich said , `` and I felt confident , so I decided to just go for it in the second run , too . I was aggressive but made a mistake and almost fell , so I decided to be more cautious in the bottom half and just try to finish my run . Between runs , Nierlich said , he and Mayer went back to their room , `` and we talked about a lot of things , but very little about the race . '' What most people here were talking about between runs was Tomba 's spectacular recovery . Italy 's `` La Bomba '' fell over on his right side in the top portion of the first course , skidded along in the snow on his elbow , then sprang back onto his skis and barely squeaked around the next gate . The mishap cost him valuable time and any chance for a medal as he finished the first run in 15th place , 2.75 seconds behind Nierlich . He had the second fastest second run but could climb only eight places . `` I was just unlucky , '' Tomba said . `` I was going really fast and I am not quite sure what happened . Maybe I am running out of luck , because I had too much of it last year . Anyway , my second run showed that I am in great shape , and I am looking forward to the slalom . '' Some Italian ski officials and journalists have complained for 6 months that Tomba spent too much time on the party circuit last summer after winning two Olympic gold medals at Calgary , but he seems to be on his way back . Tune in again Sunday for Part II of the miniseries , `` La Bomba or La Bum-ba ? '' Girardelli , who has already won a gold medal for Luxembourg in the combined , said , `` Tomba should be favored in the slalom , but I am making progress this week and am ready to go , too . '' Stenmark , the great Swede who will retire just a few days before his 33rd birthday next month during the World Cup Finals at Shigakogen , Japan , after posting a record 85 victories on the circuit , skied two even runs , the sixth fastest each time , for his sixth place . Zurbriggen , who turned 26 last Saturday , is also planning to retire , but not until March 1990 . `` I am skiing for my own pleasure now , '' he said after earning his second medal in 2 days . `` Every year , it is getting harder to train and to motivate myself . `` I am happy just to be in the top three . Today , there are 15 skiers who can win in each race . So , you have to ski to the limit and ca n't afford to make a mistake . You need a little bit of luck to win . '' Actually , there are sometimes more than 15 who must be considered contenders . Tomaz Cizman of Yugoslavia came from No . 22 for the bronze medal in Wednesday 's super-G , and Thursday , Kyle Wieche , 21 , of Farmington , Conn. , came in ninth for the highest U.S. placing , after starting No . 27 . `` It 's incredible , '' said Wieche , whose best finish in his first World Cup season was a 26th at Kirchberg , `` to be able to do this here , with everyone cheering for me . '' Wieche is part of the U.S . Ski Team 's youth movement . Two of the older hands , Felix McGrath and Tiger Shaw , did n't fare as well . McGrath finished 21st but said he is `` looking forward '' to his favorite event , the slalom . Shaw fell on the last steep pitch before the finish in the second run and tore a ligament in his left knee . He 's not looking forward to the slalom , but rather to a recovery of three to four months , as predicted by Dr. Richard Steadman , who will perform arthroscopic surgery on Shaw Tuesday at South Lake Tahoe , Calif .