Do you believe that the more you diet , the harder it is to lose weight because your body adapts and turns down your rate of burning calories -- your metabolism ? This belief is extremely popular , but wrong , according to new U.S. Department of Agriculture research by Dr. William Rumpler , who used a specially built , room-size live-in calorimeter to assess calories burned . Researchers measured calories burned during 24-hour periods before and after 28 men went on a calorie-reduced diet . Considering lower caloric intake , the men did not burn fewer calories than they did prior to the diet . `` Their metabolism rate did not decrease , '' says Dr. Paul Moe , head of the USDA lab . This is good news for dieters because `` they can now be confident that if they stay on a reduced-calorie diet , they will lose weight , '' insists Moe . He says a main reason dieters have so much trouble continuing to lose weight is because they do n't take in fewer calories for their reduced body size . `` If you were once 130 pounds and you get down to 110 , '' he explains , `` you must eat like a person who weighs 110 , not someone who still weighs 130 . '' If you fear developing pancreatic cancer , eat more beans , lentils , peas ( legumes ) and dried fruits . Ditto for prostate cancer . To ward off colon cancer ? Eat more beta-carotene foods , such as carrots , spinach and other green leafy vegetables and cut back on meat . To inhibit lung and stomach cancer , eat more fruit . Those are the implications from the latest findings of a long-term study of 34,000 Seventh Day Adventists . Those eating the most of such foods were least likely to develop such cancers . What about heart disease ? Surprisingly , after accounting for such factors as smoking , obesity and high blood pressure , `` one food stood out , as protective against heart attacks -- nuts , '' says Dr. Gary Fraser , director of the study and a professor at Loma Linda University School of Medicine . People who ate nuts four times a week had about half the chances of a fatal or non-fatal heart attack as those who ate nuts less than once a week . What kind of nuts ? That 's what Fraser wants to know too . He 's planning tests to feed men various nuts and then check their blood pressure , blood fats and blood-clotting factors . Is fiber the reason high-fiber foods seem to discourage various diseases , including cancer , heart disease and diabetes ? Maybe not . Or maybe fiber is only part of the reason . That 's what Dr. Lilian Thompson , University of Toronto , among others , is discovering . In trying to sort out what makes high-fiber , high complex carbohydrate foods healthful , she found that a compound previously thought harmful may in fact be beneficial . It 's phytate , also called phytic acid . It is highly concentrated in high-fiber foods , notably dried beans and lentils . Such legumes are well-established reducers of blood cholesterol and blood sugar . But when Thompson removed phytate from navy bean flour , it no longer stopped sharp surges of blood sugar in human volunteers . Only beans with phytate did that , regardless of their fiber content . That makes Thompson speculate that so-called `` anti-nutrients '' like phytate `` are mostly responsible for the benefits of high-fiber foods . '' Phytates may also be one reason legume-lovers have less cancer of certain types . University of Maryland researchers found that cancer-exposed rats given phytate in their drinking water had 35 % fewer cancers than rats not given phytate .