In reaction to the kidnap and rape this week of a 12-year-old girl in Huntington Beach , the Board of Supervisors appeared ready Friday to finance California 's first genetic-testing lab for the Orange County Sheriff 's Department . Authorities have said that such a crime lab might have prevented the attack on the girl because the suspect who has been arrested had been acquitted on a rape charge in April -- after prosecutors were unable to obtain genetic-evidence test results in time for the trial . Currently , California police agencies must send their genetic evidence to laboratories on the East Coast and wait -- sometimes several months -- for the results . Friday , Supervisor Don R. Roth called on the board to order a 30-day study on how the county could pay for a so-called DNA lab and how the cost might be shared with the state or other law enforcement agencies . Hours later , Supervisor Harriett M. Wieder -- who lives in the Sea Cliff on the Greens gated community where the kidnaping occurred last Sunday -- asked the board to fully fund the lab immediately at a cost of $ 120,000 . Both proposals are scheduled to be considered at the board 's meeting next Tuesday . `` I do n't want to spend any more time on additional studies or reports , '' Wieder wrote in a letter to the other supervisors . `` By acting today , the board can respond to this critical need in a responsible and timely manner that may prevent another innocent child from becoming a victim . '' Despite the different proposals , one county official said it appears that the lab will be funded : `` It 's just a question of how much and when . '' The Sheriff 's Department 's request for a genetic testing lab has been rejected by the county for the past two years because of the government 's tight fiscal condition . In the meantime , Sheriff-Coroner Brad Gates has organized a private fund-raising campaign to pay for the lab . So far his efforts have raised $ 80,000 in contributions , including about $ 25,000 from a fund-raiser last week . Assistant Sheriff Dennis LaDucer said Friday that department officials were happy to hear of the board 's plans to consider funding for the lab . But he said it would be best to finance the facility immediately . `` We 've been studying this for two years , '' LaDucer said . `` Personally , I think the issue has been studied enough . '' After such extensive study , La-Ducer said he is unaware of any other genetic testing lab in California . The state , however , is considering a plan for regional genetic labs throughout California . One of the items to be studied in Roth 's proposal would be the possibility of Orange County 's facility being designated as the state 's regional lab , reducing the cost to the county . `` The board must act to ensure that public and private funds are utilized appropriately . . . and that no unnecessary time delays or fiscal waste is made , '' Roth wrote in his proposal to the other board members . DNA testing has been used in criminal trials and investigations in at least 30 states , including California . DNA -- or deoxyribonucleic acid -- is the fundamental molecule in human life that carries a genetic code unique to every individual . That unique code can be gleaned from DNA found in samples of human hair or bodily fluids . Kyle Joseph Borges , the 29-year-old transient construction worker who was arrested Tuesday as a suspect in the kidnap and rape in Huntington Beach , was acquitted in a controversial rape trial involving an attack on a housewife in Anaheim Hills on Oct. 29 , 1988 . A Superior Court judge prevented prosecutors from introducing genetic evidence in that case because it would have delayed the trial for several months . But Deputy Dist . Atty . Dennis Bauer said the genetic evidence `` was very persuasive and very strong evidence . `` If this is the same guy , it would have prevented this kidnap and rape because he 'd still be in custody , '' Bauer said .