A massive electronic network linking more than 60,000 computers remains vulnerable to potentially crippling attack by computer `` viruses , '' the General Accounting Office reported Thursday . The GAO , an investigative arm of Congress , said the White House science adviser should oversee efforts to help protect the network , Internet , from sabotage . It said lax security procedures on Internet contributed to the severity of problems that resulted when a software virus `` infected '' the system last November , crippling thousands of computers . Internet , the main computer network used by the U.S. research community , comprises more than 500 national , regional and local networks nationwide and overseas . Two of the largest component networks are sponsored by the Pentagon 's Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and the National Science Foundation . The GAO report was released at a hearing of the House Energy and Commerce subcommittee on telecommunications and finance . Jack L. Brock Jr. , director of the GAO 's government information and financial management division , said that since the virus attack last fall , security has been strengthened on many computers connected to Internet . However , `` we still feel that the lack of central control ( over security ) . . . remains a problem , '' he added . Computer viruses are usually small strings of code that programmers can use to infiltrate a computer 's software and replicate a procedure thousands of times , causing computer systems to `` crash . '' In some cases the code can destroy computer data . The GAO report noted that currently `` there is no lead agency or organization responsible for Internet-wide management . Responsibility for computer security rests largely with the host sites that own and operate the computers . '' 'Interagency Group ' To help ensure needed security improvements , the GAO recommended that the President 's science adviser , through the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy , `` coordinate the establishment of an interagency group . . . to serve as the Internet security focal point . '' It said this group should provide Internet-wide security policy , direction and coordination ; support continuing efforts to enhance Internet security , and become an integral part of the structure that emerges to manage a high-speed National Research Network planned for the 1990s .