Midshipman 1st Class John Duvall III recalled the time his roommate asked him why he wore a do-rag to bed at night . `` I explained to him that black men use it , that you can tie it up and it holds your hair down , keeps the ends down , '' Duvall said of his old cloth headwrap . Duvall is black and his roommate is white . `` Now he wears one . '' Conversations about black culture , concerts by soul musical groups and observances honoring Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. are increasingly becoming a part of the U.S . Naval Academy experience , almost as much as the military balls and classical performances by the glee club . The change is partly because of an increase in the number of black midshipmen from about a dozen 20 years ago to a high of 250 this year in the 4,500-member brigade . But another factor has been the Midshipmen 's Black Studies Club , about 216 black midshipmen and a few whites , who said they have taken on the teaching of black history and culture as a crusade . Began 1 Years Ago The club was founded by black midshipmen 14 years ago . Such a black organization had not existed before because there were not enough black midshipmen to form one , said Samuel P. Massie , a chemistry professor who became the first black faculty member in 1966 . In its early years , the club 's purpose was to provide social alternatives to academy functions , members and faculty said . But in the last three years , the club 's focus has changed . It now offers the entire brigade glimpses of black culture , such as song , dance and tribal history , to supplement the two courses the academy teaches , black literature and black-white relations . `` We teach midshipmen about black contributions , male and female , past and present , and their positive effect on life in America , '' said Midshipman 1st Class Dondi Edwards , the club 's president . Club members , however , do not just stick to textbook history . They have been called on by other midshipmen to explain the phenomenon of comedian Eddie Murphy , the logistics of the Cabbage Patch ( a popular dance ) and the secrets of fashionable dressing as well . Aid in Acceptance Some midshipmen say the club events have helped black and white midshipmen accept one another . At the academy , which produces the cream of the Navy and the Marines ' officers and technical experts , fitting in is sometimes as high a priority as passing the 40-minute swimming test , they said . Moreover , in this arena where performance and rank determine power , success is often measured by classmates ' and officers ' impressions . Take Midshipman 1st Class Joseph Smith , who graduated from a prominent Shreveport , La. , school for high achievers . He came to the academy with a 4.3 high-school grade-point average and his `` father 's arrogance , '' he said . But his first remembrance on arriving four years ago was being the only black person on the bus . That feeling of isolation sometimes continued in classes and activities , he said . `` If you have 100 marbles and 95 are clear and five are black , you 're going to notice the black ones , '' he said . `` If he is an outstanding performer or if he is a poor performer , he 's going to stand out . That 's the difference . '' Comment on Welfare Smith said feelings of being different show up anywhere , even in friendly discussions among friends of other races . `` We were discussing welfare reform , '' Smith recalled . `` I remember somebody making a comment : 'Well , why do n't they just go out and get jobs ? ' `` Well , my family 's been on welfare before . So I understand everyone on welfare is not some lazy bum who 's sitting around collecting a check because he does n't want to work . It bothered me that they would think that . '' The Black Studies Club does not limit its activities to the academy . It has been praised by black community leaders and city officials for its work with black youths . Club members tutor students from public housing in math and science , the midshipmen 's best subjects . They sing as part of the U.S . Naval Academy Gospel Choir at area colleges and along the East Coast . They serve as ushers and escorts for civic social functions . And they have become a growing source of support in Annapolis ' network of black churches . Models for Black Youths The black midshipmen say they want to serve as models for the city 's black youths at a time when the number of black teen-agers arrested for involvement in illegal drug activity is rising . `` Those midshipmen are examples of something attainable . It 's right within reach , '' said Bertina Nick , head of Energizing Self and Community , a civic organization that promotes black youth achievement . `` We try to reach out to the youth , '' said Edwards , who grew up in a Philadelphia housing project . His mother borrowed money to send him to private schools . `` We want to show them that the only difference between them and us is we 've had . . . opportunities , and we wear the uniform here at the academy because we 've had those opportunities , '' he said . The Black Studies Club is the only such group at the nation 's military service academies and provides support that the midshipmen can not get anywhere else , said Lt. Cmdr . Ruby Miller . `` It gives them a sense of direction , '' said Miller , who oversees the club 's activities . `` A lot of times people tend to be quiet , withdrawn . Not these guys . '' Help With Test Preparation The black midshipmen are drawn to each other by their shared backgrounds and stick together to increase black attendance at the academy , club members said . Every Saturday , club members recruit minority students by phone from the admissions office , and they help each other prepare for academic and physical examinations . Club members -- black and white -- say participating in the group 's functions has changed their attitudes about racism and cultural differences . `` Before I came to the academy , I did n't know that many black people that well , '' said Midshipman 1st Class Christopher Thomas , 22 . `` This is the first time I 've ever been interested in their backgrounds , be it African stuff or where they live . . . . `` Thomas , who grew up in Potomac , Md. , became one of the club 's few white members two years ago and regularly tutors black students . He said he considers the club activities a part of his training . `` A lot of my sailors are going to be black , '' he said . `` It will give me a chance to know about the people I 'll be leading . ''