There 's just no escape to ironing , a domestic chore that has pressed its way back from the Egyptian era to modern day . And with the resurgence of natural fibers , laundry irons have become even hotter . Another trend that puts irons back to work is dressed-up tables , using a variety of interesting fabrics for tablecloths , overlays and napkins . A far cry from the clunky and heavy early electric inventions , the new streamlined irons are lightweight , a feature that can be attributed to improvements in plastic technology . Today there 's an iron for every whim or need . If you 're forgetful , there are irons equipped with electronic timers and microchip controllers that shut off automatically when not in use . If you ca n't live without the spray bottle , you definitely should look into an iron that features a spray button , which releases thin jets of water to dampen those creases . And do n't worry about having to use distilled water , another great development is that the new irons can take tap water . And who 's got the best steam ? Competing in this hot arena are models with `` burst of steam '' features and larger reservoir capacity . Another welcomed factor is ease in ironing and cleaning . To alleviate this common problem , soleplates now come finished with specially treated , easy-glide , non-stick coatings . And if looks are important to you , some irons now come in fashion colors , in bold or pastel shades . If you 're in the market for a new iron this year , these newer irons were designed to make ironing a more pleasant and bearable task for you . The most unique feature of the Tefal Steam Iron is its extremely smooth soleplate . In tests conducted by ironing across the zipper on a pair of jeans 12,000 times , non-stop , the soleplate on the Tefal iron came out like new -- smooth and scratch-free . This lightweight iron from France exclusively features Super Gliss soleplate , a coating of pure Durilium . Tefal 's theory is that when the plate is scratched , it picks up starch and dirt and becomes difficult to clean . Easy gliding is possible because friction between the fabric being ironed and the iron surface is also reduced by up to 20 % . Sleek-looking in white with pastel trims , the Tefal irons are available in two types of model series : the more deluxe Pressing Plus series ( from $ 75 to $ 80 ) and the lightweight Pressing Light Series ( $ 60 ) . The first type , which comes in two models , features the following : an automatic shut-off system after 30 seconds in a horizontal position and after five minutes when left upright ; a self-cleaning feature , an anti-clogging valve , six temperature control settings to suit any fabric , water spray button , burst of steam ( 30 grams steam per minute ) a transparent water tank with 7 1/2-ounce capacity , a reversible cord for left or right hand use and convenient cord storage in heel . The Pressing Light Series has all of the above features except for the automatic shut-off and limited burst of steam functions ; both irons provide a 10-year limited warranty on the soleplate . A company that 's been in the iron business for over 75 years and who pioneered the first automatic steam iron is Rowenta from West Germany . In addition to its popular line of Tapmaster Iron series ( from $ 55 ) that features all the bells and whistles found in an ideal steam-and-spray iron , Rowenta has included two advanced models . The latest and and most exciting addition is the Rowenta Excellence Iron DA-82 ( $ 75 ) . This powerful 1,200-watt iron is designed with a convenient `` tank-within-a tank '' system that maintains hydrostatic pressure necessary inside the water tank to produce a constant level of steam no matter how much water is in the reservoir . The Excellence iron seems to have a mind of its own . As the density of fabrics increases , the steam pressure increases , forcing steam into the nap of even the most difficult fabrics ; and vice versa for light and delicate fabrics . The water tank is transparent and detachable and when removed , one can maneuver the iron under cuffs or inside pleats . Aside from having the power to deliver a super shot of steam on demand , the Rowenta iron has extra large-size soleplate for greater steam distribution . The Rowenta Control Electronic Iron DA-80 ( $ 80 ) offers a full shiny metal base and is said to `` think on its feet '' even when it 's not standing . Like the Tefal iron , it is equipped with a microchip that enables the iron to turn off automatically if it is left resting on its base for 30 seconds or if left upright unattended 8 minutes . But going a step further , the Rowenta version even turns off automatically if it tips over or drops to the floor . The shut-off is indicated by a built-in audible alarm that instantly beeps for two minutes . Another appliance manufacturer that has been taking irons seriously for years is Proctor-Silex . Made in the USA , the newer offerings range from mid-size lightweight irons ( from $ 17 to $ 27 ) to full-size irons ( from $ 33 to $ 48 ) . Each mid-size unit has a reversible cord that wraps up and snaps securely for neat storage . They 're available in white body and colored handle cover and trim ( slate blue , light gray or almond ) . The full-size irons from Proctor-Silex have extra-large soleplates with 53 steam vents for wider coverage . The plates also have slim points with button grooves for quick ironing of collars , sleeves and around buttons . The full-size iron range includes models with electronic shut-off memory ( shuts off when left unattended on its heel for 15 minutes , or unmoved on its soleplate for 30 seconds ) ; blast of steam and spray features ; SilverStone , and self-cleaning plates . The irons are also available in white with pastel trims . Last but not least is the steam/spray/dry Caretex Iron ( $ 80 ) from Robert Krups . The 1,000-watt iron has an adjustable steam feature for varied types of fabric . Its see-through water tank is removable . The professional-type iron comes with a unique napped fabric shoe that is a separate ironing piece shaped like the iron 's flat surface , but with many more holes for even steam distribution . This helps eliminate the sheen that you get when ironing corduroy , flannel and velvet . Other features include automatic steam shut off and power spray . The Tefal Pressing Plus irons are available at Bullock 's and Adray 's . The Krups Caretex irons are available at selected Broadway stores . The Rowenta irons are available at Bullock 's and Robinson 's . The Proctor-Silex irons are available at May Co. , JC Penney and Long 's Drugs .