Yankee Oldtimers Day used to be ... well , it used to be glory to the highest . Memories of Ruth and DiMaggio and Mantle ; Gomez , Reynolds and Ford -- and a line of nostalgia and prenostalgia that stretched as far as the heart could see . Well , nostalgia is n't what it used to be . Somehow the Steinbrenner reign has managed to drain the life and breath out of that , too . The fact that Phil Rizzuto was honored for 50 years -- a half-century -- of service to the Yankees provides the bright light that emphasizes the darkness . Rizzuto remains the good guy in an organization that has made good people suffer ( see Bucky Dent standing so relaxed at the batting cage with the Yankees ' oldtimers ) . People told tales of delight about Rizzuto that made the day what it was . The Yankees invented Oldtimers Day for Lou Gehrig 's retirement in 1939 and made it an annual institution with Babe Ruth Day in 1947 . Now it 's a way for them to seduce fannies into the seats . Will anybody come to see Eric Plunk in 20 years ? Did anybody come to see Tom Shopay or Gary Thomasson Saturday ? Better look at who was n't there . After all , it was a day to honor Rizzuto . Tommy Henrich was n't invited . Neither were Hank Bauer , Johnny Mize , Gene Woodling , Allie Reynolds , Eddie Lopat and Jerry Coleman . All they were , were the heart of the Rizzuto Yankee teams that won nine pennants and seven World Series . The game has its budget , explained Jim Ogle , the director of the Yankee Alumni Association , `` and we have to have guys young enough to play three innings . '' Mickey Mantle was n't there , Ogle said , because the successor to The Great DiMaggio had a commitment to a card show in Rhode Island . You mean he did n't save this day ? Yogi Berra was n't invited because he has vowed not to return to Yankee Stadium as long as Steinbrenner owns the team . And he has the class to stick to it , to the point of apologizing over dinner to his old Rizzuto . ( Yogi has not said what his position will be if Steinbrenner is suspended . ) Dent brought with him the link to the Yankees ' last pennant . It was that link to glory Steinbrenner cynically used when he brought Dent back to manage , a job he was neither prepared for nor suited to fill . On June 6 he was fired . And paid off in full , he explained Saturday . He wanted to make it perfectly clear , he said , that he had only good relations with Steinbrenner . `` He never shouted at me , '' Dent said . He was just treated cruelly , which may explain why the nostalgic ovation for Dent trailed only those for DiMaggio and Rizzuto himself . The fact that Rizzuto is not in the Hall of Fame is a great injustice . There can be no dynasty -- and rarely a pennant -- without a superior shortstop . Ted Williams has said that if the Red Sox had Rizzuto at shortstop on that great-hitting team , Boston would have had the succession of championships . `` I am prejudiced , '' Whitey Ford said . `` Phil was Most Valuable Player when I was a rookie . '' That was in 1950 ; how many shortstops have been voted MVP ? Mantle came along in 1951 . The thought of an Oldtimers Day without Mantle boggles the mind . What will it be when DiMaggio no longer can attend ? He 's 75 . Perhaps the new order of hostility around the Yankees has come home to them . To this generation of Yankee fans , Dent 's time is the new nostalgia . But Chris Chambliss was too busy to ask for a day off managing in the Detroit organization . Graig Nettles , Ogle said , had a prior commitment . Reggie Jackson declined the last two invitations and was n't sent another . Roy White was n't invited . Steinbrenner suspects it was White 's contacts who directed pitcher Bill Gullickson to Japan . It is supposed to be a day of celebration -- even a time for the ink-stained wretches to draw on about bygone days with bygone players . But Steinbrenner 's people set up more and more obstacles all the time . As one polite functionary said : `` The feeling is not here no more . '' Nor is the talent , as the White Sox ' six-run second inning Saturday exposed , the Yankees dropping fundamentals everywhere . They have n't finished last since 1966 and have n't lost 90 games since 1967 . They have n't lost 100 games , which appears to be their destiny , since 1912 . `` I ca n't believe this could happen , '' said Tommy Byrne , whose pitching benefited from Rizzuto 's presence . Byrne recalled a ninth inning against Bob Lemon with DiMaggio on third base and one out . DiMaggio was moving on the squeeze and Lemon threw the ball directly at Rizzuto 's head -- a difficult pitch to bunt . `` Somehow Phil got the bat up here and put the ball down perfectly , '' Byrne said . `` Joe scored and Lemon just threw his glove up in the air . `` It was unbelievable . It was the greatest bunt I ever saw . And Phil ran to first base , so he got credit for the hit . '' Bobby Brown , the president of the American League , played third base in eight of Rizzuto 's seasons . `` He played shorstop as well as it can be played , '' Brown said . `` Nobody ever could make a double play better than Rizzuto and Coleman . '' Players were always putting crawly things in Rizzuto 's glove -- or worse -- to see his terror . Johnny Lindell and Spec Shea once hid a live lobster in Rizzuto 's pants leg . `` The opposition did it , too , '' Ford said . `` You do n't do that unless you like a guy . '' Now , at 72 , he is best known as a broadcaster and a character . Like the time his broadcasting partner Bobby Murcer got to the booth and asked Phil about what looked like a tobacco tin on the table . `` That 's Harry , '' Rizzuto explained . `` He was a great Yankee fan who said , 'When I die , please scatter my ashes in center field in Yankee Stadium . '' ' Rizzuto brought the urn , but the grounds crew would n't let him scatter the ashes . So Rizzuto was taking the urn home with him . What happened to the ashes ? You 'll have to ask Rizzuto . I went to ask him , but he had already gone home . He would n't have left if the guys were there .