QUESTION : I am 35 years old with a wife and two young children . I earn $ 77,000 annually and own a house and an investment condominium in Southern California . I have a career-enhancing opportunity that will require my relocating to the Midwest for about five years . I am wondering what I should do with my house . I 'd like to rent it out while we are away . Even though my monthly mortgage is about $ 500 more than I could get in rent , I want to keep the house because I feel it has much appreciation potential . I could still buy a house in the Midwest by either selling the condo , which is not appreciating much , or some stock , which also do n't show much appreciation potential . What do your advisers suggest ? -- E. S. K. ANSWER : Our advisers expressed some skepticism about your plan . Do you really think you can adequately manage a rental property , particularly one that was your own house , from a distance of 2,000 miles ? Can you really afford to subsidize your renters to the tune of $ 500 per month ? If so , proceed . If not , you should rethink your plan before you do anything you might later regret . Assuming that you do decide to convert your home into a rental , how will you finance the purchase of a house in the Midwest ? Thomas Gau , a financial planner with Kavish & Gau in Torrance , thinks that you should probably sell the stock to raise the money for the down payment . He reasons that if the stock has n't appreciated much , then you probably wo n't owe much tax on it and you can apply the proceeds toward the down payment . On the other hand , if you sell the condo , you could face tax on the appreciated value , leaving you with less to put toward the down payment on the house . He also notes that the depreciation on the condo affords you a tax deduction you may not want to give up . Strategy on Retirement Plan Payout Is Good Q : Our company is dropping its retirement plan , and I will shortly be receiving a distribution of about $ 50,000 . I want to use about $ 10,000 of the amount to pay off some personal debts and reinvest the remainder in some sort of a tax-sheltered retirement account . However , my accountant told me that if I spend the $ 10,000 before I re-invest the remaining $ 40,000 , I will be subject to income taxes on the entire $ 50,000 . She said I must first invest the $ 50,000 and then pull out $ 10,000 the following year , at which time I will be subject to taxation on just the $ 10,000 . This all sounds pretty strange to me . Can you make any sense of it ? -- D. C. A : What your accountant told you used to be true . But the law has changed , and essentially the strategy you originally intended to use is now permitted without dire tax consequences . The law governing retirement plan distributions allows a taxpayer to take a partial personal disbursement and roll over the remaining funds into a tax-deferred retirement account . Of course , you will be taxed on whatever amount you withdraw for your personal use . Carla Lazzareschi can not answer mail individually but will respond in this column to financial questions of general interest . Please do not telephone . Write to Money Talk , Business Section , Los Angeles Times , Times Mirror Square , Los Angeles , Calif. 90053 .