Richard M. Nixon dedicated his presidential library Thursday to the ringing applause of his three Republican successors and 50,000 spectators , proclaiming his belief in the American Dream but not mentioning the Watergate scandal that drove him from office 16 years ago . Three brass bands played , red-suited trumpeters heralded the arrival of the Presidents and organizers sent red , white and blue balloons aloft at the end of the 2 1/2-hour ceremony . `` Nothing we have ever seen matches this moment -- to be welcomed home again , '' Nixon said . As he did in his latest book , `` In the Arena , '' he spoke about the theme of struggle and the role it has played in his life from his childhood in Yorba Linda to his political victories and tragedies . `` I believe in the American Dream because I have seen it come true in my own life , '' he said . `` You will suffer disappointments in your life and sometimes you will be discouraged . `` It is sad to lose , '' he continued . `` But the greatest sadness is to travel through life without knowing either victory or defeat . '' The gathering on the open-air stage marked the first conclave of four Presidents in nine years and the first time ever that four American Presidents attended a public event . President Bush and Nixon were joined by Gerald R. Ford , Nixon 's successor , and Ronald Reagan , Bush 's predecessor . Each man was accompanied by his wife . Only Democrat Jimmy Carter did not attend , citing a prior commitment . Seated in the sweltering audience were a `` Who 's Who '' of the Nixon years and later Republican administrations , including four former secretaries of state -- Henry Kissinger , William Rogers , George P. Shultz and Alexander Haig . The four drew hordes of autograph seekers and photographers as they sat nearly shoulder to shoulder . The gathering in this small Orange County city -- as well as a dinner in Nixon 's honor in Century City on Thursday night -- also attracted protesters against government policy on Central America , and on behalf of the homeless , AIDS research and the environment . A small number briefly interrupted Bush 's Yorba Linda speech honoring Nixon , but there were no arrests . The Century City demonstration was louder , and larger , and Los Angeles police made some arrests , but there was no violence . Mixing with former colleagues in the special VIP section were H.R . Haldeman , chief of staff in the Nixon White House , and Maurice Stans , former secretary of commerce . Haldeman was convicted of conspiracy , obstruction of justice and perjury in the Watergate break-in and cover-up . Stans pleaded guilty to violating election laws covering contributions to Nixon 's reelection campaign in 1972 . Each President spoke , but only Bush said the W word -- Watergate . He told the crowd that museum-goers `` will hear of Horatio Alger and Alger Hiss . Of ( Nixon 's ) book , 'Six Crises , ' and the seventh crisis , Watergate . '' Bush was among those who broke with Nixon 's defenders in the last days of the Nixon presidency . After the revelation of the final `` smoking gun '' tape showing that Nixon had tried to use the CIA to block the FBI 's investigation of Watergate , Bush hand-delivered a letter to the White House saying : `` I would now ill-serve a President , whose massive accomplishments I will always respect , and whose family I love , if I did not give you my judgment . . . resignation is best for this country , best for this President . '' It was the same tape that virtually assured that the House of Representatives would vote for impeachment . Two days later , Nixon became the first President to resign . On Feb. 29 , 1974 , Nixon was named an unindicted co-conspirator in a sealed indictment by the special Watergate grand jury . The news did not become public until June of that year . Thursday 's library dedication was widely viewed as a milestone in Nixon 's political rehabilitation . The $ 21-million presidential library , the first in California , is next door to the simple wooden farmhouse his father built from a kit several years before Nixon was born in 1913 . Bush hailed Nixon as `` the quintessence of middle America , '' a man who spoke loudly and eloquently for the `` silent majority from Dallas to Davenport , Syracuse to Silver City . '' Bush recalled the highlights of Nixon 's presidency , citing his trip to China , ending more than two decades of U.S.-China bitterness , and his peace efforts in the Middle East . He added : `` Who can forget how in Moscow , Richard Nixon signed the first agreement to limit strategic nuclear arms -- giving new hope to the world for a lasting peace ? `` Finally and most importantly , I would say to visitors : Richard Nixon helped change the course not only of America but of the entire world , '' Bush said . The President said future generations will remember Nixon most `` for dedicating his life to the greatest cause offered any President -- the cause of peace among nations . '' Reagan joked about Nixon 's rocky relationship with the media : `` Much has been written and said about Richard Nixon ; some of it has even been true , '' he said . `` It will come as no surprise to anyone here that there will always be a good deal of debate about Richard Nixon , '' Reagan said . `` Generally speaking , people in public life who take bold steps , who make tough decisions and who show great courage , generate controversy . '' Reagan called Nixon a patriot and praised his contributions in foreign policy . `` Richard Nixon is a man who understands the world , '' Reagan said , `` a man whose foreign policy was universally acknowledged as brilliant . I do n't think it 's an exaggeration to say the world is a better place -- a safer place -- because of Richard Nixon . '' Ford recalled going to Congress for the first time in 1949 and meeting Nixon , who had been elected two years earlier to the lower house but was `` already renowned as the nemesis of Alger Hiss , '' the alleged State Department spy for the Soviet Union who was convicted of perjury . The Hiss case started Nixon 's quick rise to power , which saw him become a U.S. senator in 1950 and vice president in 1952 . Referring to the wave of democracy sweeping across eastern Europe , Ford credited the four Presidents and the American people , but especially Nixon . William E. Simon , Nixon 's former treasury secretary and president of the library foundation , spoke most bluntly about Nixon 's decades-long battles with the news media . Simon said Nixon 's accomplishments came `` despite . . . the unrelenting hostility of the national media . '' The four Presidents toured the house where Nixon was born , and which has been restored and given a brand-new look . It contains the piano he played and the bed in which he was born . The four also toured the museum , the only presidential museum financed and operated entirely by private funds . Police and library officials said the crowd of 50,000 included dozens who camped out overnight on the sidewalks on Yorba Linda Boulevard , site of the building , to ensure a place near the front of the line . Thousands more began arriving as early as 4 a.m. , many of them wearing `` Nixon 's No . 1 '' T-shirts . Others wore hats shaped like elephants -- the Republican Party symbol -- carted video cameras and waved American flags . In Century City , 1,500 Nixon friends and admirers gathered inside the Century Plaza , while outside the hotel , more than 300 protesters crowded Avenue of the Stars for a loud demonstration . Representing an array of causes , they chanted `` Stop GOP Death Squads '' and decried malathion spraying and antiabortion legislation . Placards included `` Republican Leaders Fail People With AIDS '' and `` Stop the U.S. War in El Salvador . '' Fourteen people , including Ted Hayes , an advocate for the homeless , were arrested for trespassing and failure to disperse . The demonstration ended shortly after 8 p.m . Reaction among the arriving dinner guests was mixed . George Tassios , a Los Angeles engineer , said the protesters should be sprayed with water cannons filled with indelible ink . But Buck Johns , an Orange County developer and GOP fund-raiser , was more sanguine . `` That 's fun , '' he said . `` It 's America . '' Times staff writers David Lauter , Tony Marcano , Maria Newman , Eric Lichtblau , Ralph Frammolino , Ted Johnson , Tammerlin Drummond , Marla Cone , David Reyes , Matt Lait , Jim Newton , Bill Billiter , Ann Conway , Lanie Jones , and Sonni Efron , and correspondents Laura Michaelis , Jon Nalick and Shannon Sands contributed to this story .