John Anderson is far too young to be acting as if he 's one of country 's grizzled warhorses , but so he seemed , for better and worse , in his early show Monday evening at the Crazy Horse Steak House and Saloon . Like Willie Nelson and other vets , Anderson has carved his own vocal niche in country with an almost-quirky style that makes him immediately recognizable . But , even more like Nelson , his 20-song show was practically running on autopilot . His performance was never less than solid and workmanlike , but it was rarely more than that ; one got the impression that it was n't a show Anderson is going to remember through the years . He opened with his early hit , `` Black Sheep of the Family , '' and closed the pre-encore set with the early-'80s breakthrough hit , `` Swingin ' . '' Between them he stuck to the tried and true , ignoring most of his recent songs from 1989 's `` Too Tough to Tame '' and the previous year 's `` 10 . '' But while there were few surprises in the song selection , his voice was full of little revelations . Anderson has a plaintive , almost pinched voice that is distinctive enough , but it is his use of dynamics that is unique , the way his voice fades in and out of hearing in the oddest places . Seeing him live , it becomes obvious that this is not so much the product of his vocal cords as it is from his microphone technique , with his head flinching away from the mike several times during each line of a song . It is no mere novelty , though , as Anderson 's Morse code vocal dropouts seemed to be keyed by his emotions . On the troubled ballad `` Down in Tennessee '' or his encore `` Yellow Creek '' -- dealing with the Cherokee Indians ' Trail of Tears -- his voice , and that sudden lack of it , was a powerful conduit of feelings . Just as often , though , he delivered rote versions of standards , with the effort of staying tuned to his here-and-gone voice bringing scant reward . It was indeed an effort , because at most points the sound mix had his voice submerged below practically every instrument in his six-piece band . Perhaps the sound man figured that everyone had come to hear the bass player , as the moments were few when Anderson 's voice prevailed in the speakers . Those came only when he put his voice into overdrive , as on the raucous `` Let Somebody Else Drive '' and a powerfully rendered `` Peace in the Valley . '' If all the performances in his set had been as involved , it might have been a tremendous show . But in addition to toss-off versions of `` I 'm Just an Old Chunk of Coal '' and other songs , Anderson chose to clutter the set with two banjo instrumentals . He was competent on the instrument , but so is the guy in the cabin on the `` Pirates of the Caribbean '' ride .