Elizabeth Montgomery plays a paleontologist who travels to Africa in search of the remains of a 3 million-year-old man , but must first get past miner Robert Foxworth , in `` Face to Face . '' The `` Hallmark Hall of Fame '' production airs Jan. 24 on CBS . `` Late Night With David Letterman '' will celebrate its eighth anniversary with a 90-minute prime-time special Feb. 1 on NBC . Music Television recently was launched in Yugoslavia , continuing its move eastward , having already debuted in Hungary , the Soviet Union and East Berlin . MTV is currently available in 16 countries . Graham Kerr , better known as `` The Galloping Gourmet , '' is returning to television in a new fall cooking show being offered to stations for first-run syndication . Ray Sharkey , playing a Miami detective who took a bad turn and spent time in prison , has a tough time getting his life back on track in `` The Take , '' an upcoming USA Network cable movie . Lisa Hartman co-stars . Albert Finney stars in two new cable movies airing later this month . He 's a disillusioned correspondent on a hit newsmagazine TV show in `` The Image , '' a Home Box Office movie debuting Jan. 27 and co-starring John Mahoney , Kathy Baker , Swoosie Kurtz and Marsha Mason . A few days earlier , he plays a British agent trying to solve a mysterious death in `` The Endless Game '' Jan. 21 on Showtime . George Segal is an American agent who may have the crucial information he needs . James Arness is shocked to find his long-lost love 's ranch ablaze and a 21-year-old daughter he has never seen ( played by Amy Stock-Poynton ) in `` Gunsmoke II : The Last Apache . '' The CBS movie , filmed in Texas , co-stars Richard Kiley , Michael Learned and Joe Lara . Cable 's Discovery Channel has reached an exclusive three-year agreement to air some of the British Broadcasting Corp. 's most popular programming in the United States . The shows include the 13-part history series `` America '' and `` The Making of a Continent , '' about the effect American genealogy has on the course of human life .