The Supreme Court let stand Tuesday a controversial ruling that biographers and historians may not use unpublished letters , manuscripts , diaries and other works without the permission of the writers or their heirs . Without comment , the high court dismissed an appeal by a company that had published `` Bare-Faced Messiah '' by Russell Miller , a biography critical of the late L. Ron Hubbard , founder of the church of Scientology ( Holt vs. New Era Publications , 89-869 ) . The original ruling , made last April by the U.S. 2nd Circuit Court of Appeals in New York , allowed publication of `` Bare-Faced Messiah '' to proceed on a technicality but declared that unpublished works `` normally enjoy complete protection '' from being quoted by others . That ruling was denounced by scholars , authors and free speech advocates . The publisher , Henry Holt & Co. , said at the time that the ruling was `` being used to muzzle responsible biographers and historians . '' Moreover , Holt said , the ruling forced publishers to engage in `` self-censorship '' and prevented the examination of historical truth . During his lifetime , Hubbard had written letters to the FBI , the White House and the Veterans Administration , letters that biographer Miller obtained through a Freedom of Information request . He planned to quote from the letters in an effort to show that Hubbard was a fraud and a liar . But lawyers for the church 's publishing house filed a copyright infringement suit against Holt and Miller , arguing that church officials had the exclusive right to use the unpublished letters . The appeals court , on a 2-1 vote , agreed , although it rejected the Scientologists ' effort to block the book because the suit was filed too late . Three years ago , the New York-based court first aroused concern in the publishing industry by blocking a planned biography of reclusive author J. D. Salinger because the book contained excerpts from his private letters . Lawyers for Salinger contended that the right to publish those letters was his alone . In 1987 , the Supreme Court refused to review that decision , but some publishing lawyers said the ruling appeared to cover only the highly personal letters of a still living author . The ruling involving the Hubbard materials went further , and , in appeals to the high court , the Assn . of American Publishers described the rulings in the Salinger and Hubbard cases as `` a one-two punch landed by the 2nd Circuit on historical and scholarly publishing . In the wake of these decisions . . . no prudent publisher can afford to risk even very limited quotation from unpublished materials -- no matter the degree of their prior dissemination or how compelling the purpose -- since to do so invites injunction of the entire work . ''