For people who do n't want to be pinned down to a single style , American country is one of the best decorating choices . Since it is an adaptation of rural designs to suit contemporary needs and not from a single period or place , American country is well adapted to today 's needs , says designer Raymond Waites . Waites has written several books on American country style and has also designed reproduction collections of furniture , fabrics , wall coverings and accessories . He says that `` the overriding point of American country is its spirit . You can mix periods and styles as long as the room maintains its casual quality . '' For example , he says it 's easily possible to put together a room that includes Shaker reproductions , primitive painted pieces and Victorian wicker . When decorating American country-style , look for rustic furniture in native American woods such as walnut , chestnut , maple and pine or painted pieces . Stanley Hura is a designer who has created many American country room settings in which to display the Museum of American Folk Art reproduction collection by Lane . He offers these tips to a successful American country room : Keep backgrounds simple and uncluttered . Choose clear colors and select accessories that are not too fussy . You can soften the feeling of the contemporary American country room with lace and floral fabrics . Or you can make the room more masculine with cowhide and American Indian motifs , he says . Hura says that there are several ways to go with traditional American country rooms . First , decide whether you want to create a formal or a rustic setting . If it 's formal -- a style that suggests small-town America of the mid-19th Century -- choose Victorian-style furniture such as adaptations of English and French pieces . Use area rugs , such as an Oriental or a needlepoint rug , on the floors . You can choose simple window treatments or more elaborate layered effects that combine a heavier fabric with a sheer undercurtain . Wallpaper the walls , making use of borders to take the place of architectural detailing that may be lacking . A more primitive and rustic room is the result when you select twig furniture , rustic pine pieces or the newly popular arts and crafts style . Place rag rugs or hooked rugs on the floors . Walls can be simply whitewashed or stenciled . Rough textured fabrics of homespun cotton and linen are appropriate , and simple country pottery and tin spatter ware are suitable . Baskets of dried flowers , flowering potted plants and original or reproductions of primitive paintings are also in character . Another variant of the American country look incorporates motifs from the American West , such as California mission furniture , ornate , yet rough-hewn Spanish or Mexican pieces , or German-American Biedermaier pieces . The color scheme comes from Indians blankets and the earth tones of the American West . An advantage in furnishing American country style is that reproductions from virtually all the earlier periods are now available . Besides colonial and federal-style furniture , you 'll find reproductions of country pieces from the 19th Century as well as copies of Mission and Arts and Crafts style furniture .