Anyone preparing for elective surgery who may need a blood transfusion should look into stockpiling his own blood . The case for self-donated , or autologous , blood is simple : Because it carries no risk of infection , your own blood is the safest blood you can get . However , while the American Medical Assn. , the American Red Cross , and the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) all recommend the use of autologous blood , only a minority of the 18 million transfusions performed annually are self-donated -- largely because too few patients are informed of this valuable alternative . Autologous blood donation started to gain popularity several years back , primarily because of the risk of being infected with the AIDS-causing HIV virus during transfusion . This risk has faded since a screening test for HIV , introduced in 1985 , greatly reduced the possibility of receiving AIDS-contaminated blood . Your chances of contracting AIDS from a blood transfusion fall somewhere between 1 in 75,000 to 1 in 500,000 per unit of blood , depending on whether blood comes from an area with high or low incidence of AIDS . More effective screening methods continue to lessen the risk of acquiring illness from a transfusion using donor ( homologous ) blood . Just this past May , the FDA approved a test to screen donor blood for hepatitis C , also called non A/non B hepatitis . ( Since earlier screens had reduced contamination from hepatitis B , hepatitis C has been responsible for 90 % transfusion-acquired hepatitis . ) However , recent research suggests that donor transfusions may suppress the immune system , increasing the risk of postsurgical infection . One study , presented at a recent meeting of the American Assn . of Blood Banks , followed the postsurgical infection rates of 105 hip replacement patients . None of those in either the transfusion-free or autologously transfused groups acquired any infection , while 23 % of the homologously transfused patients did . It seems that autologous blood -- which naturally poses no threat to your immune system -- allows the immune system to place its energies into getting you well rather than fighting suspicious foreign blood particles . One deterrent of autologous donation is that , despite iron supplementation , many donors become anemic before an adequate amount of blood is stored because their body does not replace the depleted red blood cell ( RBC ) supply fast enough . On average , an `` adequate supply '' usually requires that three to four pints of `` units '' be donated in the month before surgery . ( Fully stocked , the body 's blood supply is about 9.5 pints . ) Fortunately , new genetic technology may make it easier to store that much blood . A recent study published in the New England Journal of Medicine found that the anemia was the result of insufficient levels of the hormone erythropoietin , or EPO . Produced by the kidneys in response to a decrease in RBCs , EPC acts as a red flag and alerts bone marrow to produce more RBCs . This multicenter study showed that administering genetically manufactured EPO intravenously allowed 96 % of patients treated to store enough blood without becoming anemic . The down side : At the moment , treatment costs are high -- about $ 2,500 a patient -- and , because the procedure is still investigational , insurance companies have not yet established a policy on reimbursement . Other ongoing studies are examining the effects of lower-dose therapy , which should bring costs down . When autologous donations are not an option , as in an emergency or in operations such as open-heart surgery that involve massive blood loss , another option for utilizing your own blood is a technique known as intraoperative autologous transfusion ( IAT ) . In this procedure , blood lost during the surgery is collected and recycled through a machine that filters and cleans it , and then feeds it back into your circulatory system . However , because of the possibility of contamination , intraoperative transfusions are not used for open-bowel surgeries , cancer operations , or cases where there is an infection at the site of the surgery . A well-marketed option -- donating your blood now , and then freezing and storing it for possible later use -- is definitely not good transfusion insurance . One obstacle is the cost : Red Cross and hospital blood banks do not have enough storage space to hold frozen blood indefinitely , and commercial blood banks charge up to $ 275 a unit . Transport is another problem : If you need blood in an emergency and are not near your stored supply , considerable expense is incurred in shipment , and the blood , which will take 90 minutes to thaw once your surgeon has it , might very well not get to you in time anyway . Once thawed , blood must be discarded after 24 hours -- and after three years of storage in the freezer , it must be discarded whether it is used or not . In some cases , a homologous transfusion is unavoidable . `` While autologous transfusions are the only way to guarantee 100 % transfusion safety , and should always be encouraged , '' said Dr. Paul Ness , director of the Johns Hopkins Blood Bank , `` if you do need blood , the homologous blood supply has never been safer . '' If you are scheduled for elective surgery that might require a blood transfusion , make every effort to donate autologously . Even if you are able to make only a partial donation , that will minimize the amount of blood needed from the donor pool and so may cut your transfusion risk . Donating autologously might mean extra footwork -- not all hospitals collect autologously , but most area blood centers will -- and extra cost ( more tracking and paper work add an average of $ 40 a unit to the bill , which not all insurance companies will cover ) . However , improved safety may far outweigh these considerations . DONATING BLOOD TO YOURSELF * Different surgeries require different amounts : When discussing elective surgery with your doctor , ask if you are likely to need a transfusion , and how much blood your surgery typically requires . Some surgeries that commonly require transfusions : open heart surgery ( up to 6 units ) ; orthopedic surgery ( 2 to 4 units ) ; gynecological surgery ( around 2 units ) . * Schedule far in advance : Try to schedule your surgery far enough in advance -- usually a month to six weeks -- so that you will have time to stockpile enough blood . Usually , you can donate one to two units of blood per week for up to four to five weeks before surgery . ( Blood can be stored for 42 days . ) To allow your body time to replenish its own blood volume for the surgery , you should not donate blood during the three days prior to the surgery . * Find out the location for donations : Ask your doctor where to make the donations -- usually a donor room at your hospital , or a local blood donor center -- and call and schedule your appointments . Ask the doctor if you should take iron supplements to help you avoid anemia .