In what is believed to be the first lawsuit of its kind in San Diego , a man with AIDS has sued a Hillcrest chiropractor , claiming he was refused treatment because of his disease . The suit by Robert E. Walsh Jr. , 36 , is thought to be the first filed under a year-old San Diego ordinance aimed at prohibiting discrimination against AIDS patients . Walsh claims he went to the Richmond Street office of chiropractor Joseph A. Cicmanec on Aug. 4 and requested a back realignment . Questioned About X-Rays Walsh said he filled out two forms at the receptionist 's request , and indicated on one of them that he had recently undergone chest X-rays . When the receptionist asked why he had been X-rayed , Walsh told her he had AIDS and was under a doctor 's care , according to the suit . The lawsuit alleges that the receptionist left to confer with Cicmanec , then returned and told Walsh that the chiropractor would not treat him , and told him to go to UCSD Medical Center instead . Walsh claims he was `` shamed , humiliated , degraded and emotionally upset '' and alleges that Cicmanec and his employees `` acted in a despicable manner with a willful , conscious and callous disregard '' of his `` rights and emotional condition . '' Cicmanec declined comment Wednesday , and his attorney , Laura Halgren , said only that the chiropractor `` does dispute the allegations of the complaint . '' No court date has been set for a hearing . Walsh , a state employee , also declined comment Wednesday . He was diagnosed as having Kaposi 's sarcoma , an AIDS-related cancer , in February , 1988 , according to his attorney , Timothy R. Pestotnik . Pestotnik chairs the board of the San Diego AIDS Project and helped start a free legal-advice clinic for AIDS sufferers who feel they are victims of discrimination . 'No Other Choice ' Pestotnik said Walsh went to the legal clinic within a week of his experience at the chiropractor 's office . `` He wanted to do anything he could to make the situation not happen to somebody else , '' Pestotnik said . `` I tried for five months to settle this case , but the defendant would not discuss it with us . My client and I felt we had no other choice . '' Pestotnik , whose father died of AIDS three years ago , said his law firm , Luce , Forward , Hamilton & Scripps , will represent Walsh free . Many complaints of discrimination have been taken to the legal clinic , but all of the other cases have been resolved without a lawsuit , Pestotnik said . `` We try to step in and explain to them that the disease is not transmitted casually , '' he said . `` Usually , we get an apology and a promise it wo n't happen again . The law is there , though , in case that does n't work . '' The San Diego City Council passed the February , 1988 , ordinance to enable people with AIDS and AIDS-related complex to sue landlords , employers and businesses that discriminate against them . One month earlier , the County Board of Supervisors approved a similar ordinance for unincorporated areas of the county . Similar measures have been enacted in other California cities , including Los Angeles , West Hollywood , Santa Monica , Pasadena , San Francisco , Oakland and Berkeley . A handful of lawsuits have already been filed in other cities with AIDS anti-discrimination laws , including a Los Angeles case in which an AIDS patient sued a dentist in January , 1988 , for allegedly refusing to treat him . That case is pending . Also in Los Angeles , Forest Lawn mortuary was sued in 1985 for $ 10 million for allegedly refusing to handle the body of a suicide victim who was thought to have had AIDS . In April , 1987 , a Los Angeles County Superior Court Judge ruled that a West Hollywood nail salon did not have to give a pedicure to an AIDS patient who claimed the salon discriminated against him because of his disease . The judge in that case concluded that `` there is an extremely small , but nonetheless real , risk of exposure to AIDS from the procedures of a pedicure . ''