Lee Atwater , chairman of the Republican National Committee , carried the GOP 's blessing to the site of the planned Richard M. Nixon Library in Yorba Linda Thursday , telling about 300 contributors that Nixon is `` a man who history will remember as a great President . '' `` It is already happening , '' Atwater told the crowd gathered at a reception in the bare steel structure of the future library building . `` As I travel around the country , more and more people are thinking back on the Nixon years and understanding the massive accomplishments he made . '' Atwater also praised Orange County Supervisor Gaddi H. Vasquez , host of the fund-raiser for the library on the site of Nixon 's birthplace . `` I 've got to tell you , this is a man with a future , '' Atwater said . `` This is a man you are going to be seeing and hearing about for years to come . '' Vasquez , 33 , has been encouraged by the California Republican leadership to run for a statewide office in 1990 . But he has declined , citing family reasons . But Atwater , who met Tuesday with Vasquez in Washington , said the supervisor is important to President Bush 's effort to expand the base of the Republican Party . `` I ca n't think of a better example of what the President wants us to do than Gaddi Vasquez , '' he said . Atwater 's appearance at Thursday 's a $ 100-a-person fund-raiser for the library is part of Nixon 's recent re-emergence into the spotlight . And Yorba Linda has been at the forefront of the movement . The city received national attention last week when its City Council voted unanimously to make Jan. 9 -- Nixon 's birthday -- a city holiday . Nixon `` was deeply gratified by it , '' said John Taylor , Nixon 's spokesman , who attended the fund-raiser . `` He thought it was another gesture of the genuine hospitality he has received from the people of Orange County . '' The grand opening of the Nixon library is scheduled for June 21 , 1990 , almost 16 years after his resignation from office during the Watergate scandal . Nixon is planning to appear at the grand opening of the library , which falls on the 50th anniversary of his marriage to Pat Nixon . Thursday , however , he sent a letter to be read at the fund-raiser that included a message for Atwater , who was known in the Bush presidential race for his aggressive , attack-style campaigning . `` From one old-fashioned , hardball politician to another : I know we are living in a softball era , but do n't be too kind and gentle tonight with our mutual friends in the media . If you are , they wo n't respect you in the morning . ''