It will still take years before residents along the Santa Ana River can breathe easier , but after more than two decades of effort , the way was finally cleared in Washington last Thursday to begin building more critically needed flood control protection into the Santa Ana River . The project should have been approved and funded years ago , considering that the Santa Ana River , which runs from Big Bear Lake to the Pacific Ocean , has been tagged by U.S. Army Corps of Engineers as the worst potential flood threat in the western United States . And it will stay that way , flirting with flood dangers and Mother Nature , until the work building a new dam in San Bernardino County , raising the level of the Prado Dam in Riverside County and widening and deepening the river channel in Orange County is well under way . In Orange County , Army engineers estimated that a major flood could put parts of 10 low-lying county cities under water . As many as 3,000 lives could be lost and damage could exceed $ 14 billion . That is too big a potential disaster to flirt with for so long . The breakthrough finally came in the U.S. Senate 's approval of an $ 18.4 billion energy and water bill that contained $ 20 million in start-up funds for the estimated $ 1.4 billion flood-protection project . The White House said the President would sign the bill as soon as it clears a conference committee , where the Santa Ana River allocation , approved by both houses , is expected to remain untouched . Work on the river should then start next spring . It should be given top priority and be completed as soon as possible . The sun-parched , dirt-dry river looks harmless enough now . But it has breached its banks before in recent years and will most certainly again , engineers say , without the new protections . Extensive development that has produced more rain runoff water has increased the threat in recent years . It has always been a race against time . The approval of the river plan finally gives residents a fighting chance to escape the flood danger .