Around her workplace , Dottie Kraus is called Santa Kraus and often gets Merry Krausmas wishes . It seems fitting , since she celebrates Christmas the year around with three Christmas trees and nearly 100 Santa Claus figures in her Santa Ana home . `` You can never get depressed if you have Santa Claus living in a Christmas room in your house , '' is her logical reason for the 365-day celebration . Kraus said she likes the feeling of good will that comes with Christmas . `` I love Christmas , and it 's a shame we ca n't keep that feeling the year around , '' she said . Kraus notes , however , that more people seem to be spending additional time celebrating Christmas by leaving the tree and decorations up throughout December . `` I think that helps people keep the good-will spirit for a longer time , too , '' she added . At Brea Junior High School , where Kraus works as a guidance counselor , she often metes out discipline in her office , which contains a year-round Christmas tree and part of her ornament collection . `` A lot of the students know my feeling for Christmas , and many of them send me Santa Claus figures for presents , which I add to the collection , '' said Kraus , whose Santa Claus shopping trips extend as far north as Solvang . Kraus , a Brooklyn native , has developed a hobby from her affection for the yuletide holiday by collecting sundry holiday-related items , including music boxes . Her collections have taken a toll of her home , where she has removed closets to make room for her Christmas keepsakes , including 8-foot , 4-foot and 3-foot imitation Christmas trees . `` During the Christmas holiday I buy a real tree for the living room and decorate it with the ornaments I have collected , '' she said . `` I have to have a real tree for Christmas . '' So well known is her Christmas spirit that Kraus was paid tribute at a leadership conference at the Anaheim Convention Center with an ornament-covered Christmas tree and a message that read , `` Like this snowflake , Dottie is an original . '' The tree holds a place of honor in her office , where she works as a school activities director as well as an instructor for student government classes . In addition , she is the publications director for the California Assn . of Activities and is a founding member of the Leadership Assn . of Southern California . `` I do n't have a whole lot of extra time , '' she said , `` so I have to combine my Christmas shopping with my regular shopping . '' Kraus said she 's happy with her job at the school but would n't mind getting an extra special Christmas present this year . `` I 'm looking for a job as an elementary school principal , '' she said . There was Michael Gay , a 21-year-old sailor , having a good time on a weekend liberty from the battleship USS New Jersey , which is berthed in Long Beach . He decided to visit Newport Beach and went into a store for some ice cream . Instead , he walked into an armed robbery . The suspect rifled the cash register , ran out and made his getaway in a car . Gay jumped into his own car , and the chase was on . Unfortunately -- not knowing Gay was the good guy -- witnesses in the parking lot gave police Gay 's license plate number . It was n't long before he was stopped by officers . And would you believe that while Gay was explaining the mistake , the suspect had made a U-turn and was driving by the officers ? Gay alertly pointed him out , so the cops took off and nabbed the suspect . The arraignment is set for Feb. 16 in Santa Ana Superior Court . The Villa Nova Restaurant in Newport Beach gave Gay its Outstanding Citizen Award -- as well as a complimentary meal . With ice cream .