A former federal housing official , who admits taking bribes , testified today that a federal HUD grant was arranged for a project after its developer appealed to then-Vice President George Bush . DuBois L. Gilliam , a former deputy assistant secretary of housing and urban development , testified today about scandals at HUD and described in detail how officials there steered projects to political friends , including members of Congress . Gilliam , who is serving an 18-month federal prison sentence , was testifying under a court grant of immunity from further prosecution . Under questioning by Rep. Tom Lantos ( D-San Mateo ) , chairman of the House panel investigating HUD , Gilliam said HUD officials engaged in a grant swap in order to provide $ 500,000 requested in 1985 to conduct a feasibility study for a Latino trade center in Kansas City , Mo . Gilliam said that Hector Barreto , then president of the U.S. Hispanic Chamber of Commerce , sought a HUD grant for the project but that he first told Barreto that it was not qualified under Secretary Samuel R. Pierce Jr. 's discretionary fund for special projects . He said he got a call that afternoon from Deborah Gore Dean , assistant to Pierce , saying Barreto had met with Bush and that `` she had received a call from the vice president 's staff asking about the grant , and indicated her desire to try to help get the project funded . '' As a result , Gilliam said , he persuaded a Kansas City assistant city manager to provide the grant from the city 's Community Development Block Grant funds , provided by HUD , and that in turn he arranged to have a special grant go to Kansas City to replace that money . `` In other words , let 's make a deal -- you do this and I 'll do this , '' Gilliam said . He did not name the person in the vice president 's office . Gilliam said he was unclear about the connection to Bush 's office , but said Dean had `` indicated something . . . about Mr. Barreto going on the vice president 's plane . '' Lantos , before the meeting , described the case this way : `` We will hear testimony from Mr. Gilliam about special projects -- how a particular project was funded at the request of 'someone ' in the office of the vice president , in order to get a Hispanic leader to accompany the then-vice president on a plane trip to Puerto Rico . '' Once a trusted assistant to Pierce during the Reagan Administration , Gilliam painted a picture of rampant political abuse at the agency during his initial appearance before the House Governmental Operations subcommittee on employment and housing . His second round of testimony involved so-called HUD `` special project '' grants , which were made from the secretary 's discretionary fund .