As debuts go , the concert Thursday evening was certainly little noted . Accountant 's conventions open with greater fanfare than greeted the Shostakovich Quartet . One could easily imagine that Moscow 's finest had hitchhiked into town , instead of arriving on their first U.S. tour , sponsored by the prestigious Santa Fe Chamber Music Festival . But it will certainly be long remembered by the happy few in attendence at Schoenberg Hall , UCLA . The rest of you get another chance tonight , when the ensemble plays a second program . The Shostakovich Quartet has a suave , versatile sound all its own , generally dark and soft-grained . It is capable of gruff muttering and heroic outbursts , of affecting song and taut discourse , all delivered with complete unanimity , well-blended and balanced but utterly transparent in texture . Violinists Andrei Shishlov and Sergei Pishchugin , violist Alexander Galkovsky and cellist Alexander Korchagin brought with them big , unhackneyed programs of Russian music -- most refreshing and stimulating in a season dominated by light and/or familiar repertory . The centerpiece Thursday was the Quartet No . 4 , Opus 49 , by Vasili Lobanov , a Moscow colleague . It proved a discursive but formally rounded epic , tense and angry but also revealing flashes of ironic wit . Lobanov 's style is undogmatically expressive , rooted in Shostakovich and Bartok . For all the emotional vehemence and coloristic bravura of the piece , his quartet is built on a single step-wise gesture , sometimes shrunk through microtonal inflections , sometimes displaced over octaves , chordally amplified or linked in melodic chains , but an obsessive , concentrating presence . The ensemble played the draining work with unflagging energy and stern , often savage , authority . They take risks , but proved understandably well-versed in the manifold challenges . Some of the ancestry of the Lobanov work could be heard in the rarely performed , remarkably forward-looking Quartet No . 1 by Borodin . The Scherzo , with its slashing vigor and stunning Trio in harmonics , and the Andante with its subtle modal variations and glorious part-writing , connected strongly with the rest of the agenda . The Shostakovans began with their namesake 's Fourth Quartet , in a flowing reading that started in sonorous lyricism and grew into an intense debate . The deeply serious , slightly abstracted performance explored layers of subtexts while maintaining a placidly austere surface . There was nothing austere about the encore , however . The now beaming musicians returned with Shostakovich 's `` Age of Gold '' Polka , in a gleefully hammy , sardonically explosive account . JOHN HENKEN