The fear that diets ultimately fail because the dieter 's metabolism becomes abnormally sluggish appears to be unfounded , researchers report in today 's Journal of the American Medical Assn . But , they said , long-term weight loss is still very difficult to maintain for reasons that are poorly understood . The findings are similar to those reported recently by a USC researcher . Experts previously assumed that a drop in weight triggered a permanent , corresponding drop in resting metabolic rate , the amount of energy the body requires at rest to maintain basic physiological functions such as heart rate and respiration . A permanently lowered resting metabolic rate would mean that a dieter would not burn calories as rapidly and might regain weight or have trouble shedding more pounds . However , the new studies at the University of Pennsylvania show that when overweight women who also exercised were taken off a very-low-calorie diet , their metabolism bounced back to a level that is normal for their new , lower body weight . The findings are important for individuals attempting medically supervised dieting . Some experts feared that very-low-calorie diets -- such as liquid diets -- put the body into a starvation mode , slowing metabolism to a rate that thwarted significant weight loss . Theoretically at least , dieting can work , but researchers still do n't understand why it is so hard for many people to permanently keep the weight off , said Thomas A. Wadden , associate professor of psychology at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine . `` Statistics tell us that it is extremely difficult to keep weight off ; people will still have to work very hard at this despite our favorable metabolic findings , '' Wadden said . Studies have shown that extreme dieting triggers a plunge in metabolic rate . But how the change in metabolic rate affects long-term weight control has been the subject of much research and debate . `` We have long known that when people diet , metabolic rate falls sharply . And the more you cut back your calories , the more your metabolic rate falls , '' Wadden said . `` But does it ever come back up or does it stay down ? That is what we were trying to assess . '' The study followed 18 women weighing an average of 216 pounds for 48 weeks . Nine of the women received a conventional diet of 1,200 calories a day for 48 weeks . The other nine were placed on the very-low-caloried liquid-formula diet Optifast for 16 weeks , followed by a conventional reducing diet . All the women increased their physical activity by walking . After five weeks , the resting metabolic rate dropped in both groups , most significantly in the very-low-calorie dieters . But metabolic rate rose again in both groups . After 48 weeks , metabolic rates of both groups were about 9 % lower than at the start of the study and weight had been reduced by 16 % to 19 % . `` After people lost 40 or 50 pounds , their metabolic rate is lower than it was before . That reduction in metabolic rate has to be anticipated ; it takes less fuel to keep a lighter body going than a heavier body , '' Wadden said . `` What they do n't have is a long-term suppression of the metabolic rate due to the effects of dieting . Over the long term , the metabolic rate increases to a level that is appropriate for your new , reduced body weight . '' The results mirror a similar study performed at USC by Dr. Ken Fujioka , now a San Diego-based researcher . In a study of obese women placed on a 650-calorie diet for 10 weeks , Fujioka found that the dieters ' metabolic rates fell in proportion to their weight loss . Wadden 's finding that even diets of 420 calories do not trigger long-term metabolic suppression is significant , Fujioka said . `` The question was , how many calories can you go down and not permanently lower metabolic rate ? I 'm surprised at that number ( 420 calories ) , '' he said . Because the metabolic rate was lower than before dieting , however , the dieters still needed to consume fewer calories to maintain their weight loss , Wadden said . Generally , for each 25 pounds lost , a dieter should cut back 100 calories a day . Wadden also noted that the women in the study also exercised -- a factor that might be very important in boosting metabolic rate . `` It 's important to exercise while you 're dieting , '' he said . `` The exercise preserves your muscle tissue , and the more muscle tissue you have , the higher your metabolic rate . Moreover , we know that exercise is the single known predictor of long-term weight loss . '' In a related study published earlier this year , Stanford researchers found that men who dieted but did not exercise experienced a suppressed metabolic rate . But overweight men who lost weight through exercise , but did not diet , experienced no reduction in metabolic rates . `` We 've always held that it would be better for overweight people to increase exercise than to rely totally on extremely low-calorie diets , '' said Peter Wood of Stanford . `` Exercise is less likely to have this permanent effect on the resting metabolic rate , which makes it easier for people to maintain their weight in the future . '' But , Wadden said , researchers have few other clues on how to maintain long-term weight loss . `` I 'm afraid we ca n't say you can lose weight and never regain it . ''