In a deal that would effectively put it out of business if approved , Qintex Entertainment Inc. , the bankrupt television production and distribution company , announced on Tuesday a plan to sell off assets worth more than $ 65 million in two separate transactions . Under the first deal , the company 's entertainment holdings , including Hal Roach Studios Inc. , the television miniseries `` Lonesome Dove '' and 1,000 other library titles and future development projects , would be sold to RHI Entertainment Inc. , a television production company in New York , for $ 42.4 million . In the second deal , Qintex would sell its interest in HR Broadcasting Co. to ABRY Communications in Boston for more than $ 40 million . The transaction would return $ 23 million to Qintex after debts are paid . HR Broadcasting owns television stations WTTO in Birmingham , Ala. , and WCGV in Milwaukee . `` We think , given the market for these types of assets . . . the result is as good as can be expected , and in the interest of everybody involved , '' said Qintex President Jonathan Lloyd . Qintex has continued to operate with a staff of about 50 since its bankruptcy filing last October . Lloyd said the staff would probably remain until the reorganization occurs . At that point , Qintex would essentially become a shell company . Qintex filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code after failing to pay MCA Television Ltd. $ 5.9 million owed under a film distribution agreement . The company 's financial woes started when Qintex Australia Ltd. , which owns 43 % of Qintex Entertainment , failed in a bid to buy MGM/UA Communications Corp. for $ 1.5 billion last October . That deal collapsed after Qintex Australia could not attain the funding for a $ 50-million down payment . The plan for selling Qintex 's assets was reached in an arrangement with the Beverly Hills-based company 's creditors and investment bankers Donaldson , Lufkin & Jenrette . All plans must ultimately be approved by the bankruptcy court . In conjunction with the Qintex announcement , it was disclosed that New Line Cinema Corp. and Chemical Banking Corp. plan to purchase an interest in RHI Entertainment . Chemical Bank will provide the bank loan to purchase the Qintex assets , and New Line will invest $ 7.5 million in the company .