A Ventura County Superior Court judge has levied $ 125,000 in fines against the Big 5 Sporting Goods Store chain for falsely advertising cheaply made , imitation brand-name running shoes as the real thing . Judge Edwin M. Osborne also signed an injunction forbidding the chain from further acts of misleading advertising and unfair competition , and from trying to pass off the imitations as the genuine shoes . Deputy Dist . Atty . Joseph R. Buckalew said the chain agreed as part of the judgment to stop the misleading shoe sales in all of its about 125 stores in California , Nevada and Washington state . Buckalew said Big 5 sold at least 300,000 to 400,000 pairs of the imitation running shoes within the past three to four years . Osborne 's ruling resulted from a civil suit filed by the Ventura County district attorney 's office , which charged Big 5 's parent company , United Merchandising Corp. , with false advertising and unfair business practices . The district attorney began investigating the shoe sales in June , 1988 , when marathon runner Gary Tuttle , who owns a competing running shoe store , complained that the shoes Big 5 was selling seemed to be badly made . Big 5 had claimed that it was selling running shoes made by companies such as New Balance , Etonic and Saucony at discount prices . The shoes were made by those companies , but they were poorly manufactured reproductions of the companies ' top-of-the-line shoes , Buckalew said . For instance , Big 5 sold a shoe advertised as the New Balance 660 for $ 19.99 instead of the list price of $ 66.99 . The real 660 had a plastic heel cup that braced the foot , but the copy sold by Big 5 had a flexible cardboard heel cup that gives a runner 's foot little support . And the copy of the Etonic Alpha-I shoe , which sold for $ 19.99 instead of the original $ 62.99 , had a rigid sole with a red line painted on its edge instead of the flexible sole of the real shoe , which had a red plastic heel support sandwiched into the sole . MACK REED