Staff members of The Times Orange County Edition won 60 of 91 awards presented at the annual Orange County Press Club banquet Saturday , including best news story and best magazine story . Jeanne Keevil , longtime editor of the Irvine World News , won the John ( Sky ) Dunlap award for life achievement in journalism and devotion to the community . In all , Times staffers captured 21 first-place awards , 17 second places and 22 honorable mentions . The Orange County Register won 18 awards , including nine for first place , five for second place and four honorable mentions . Register reporters also won special awards for investigative reporting and in the government watchdog category . The awards were given at a banquet at the Westin South Coast Plaza hotel in Costa Mesa . Kirstie Wilde , co-anchor of KTTV News at 10 , was the emcee . Times reporter Eric Lichtblau won the award for best news story for his account of a judge 's surprising reversal of a jury conviction of Sheryl Lynn Massip , who was accused of killing her child . Times writer Dave Lesher won first place in the best magazine award category for a profile of Orange County Supervisor Gaddi H. Vasquez . The best feature story award went to Long Beach Press-Telegram reporter Andy Rose , who described the saga of a troubled young man . Times reporter Nancy Wride won the Marjorie Freeman Award for best humorous story and took a second-place award for best column or commentary . Times staffers swept the photography competition , with Ken Hively winning two first-place awards for best sports photograph and best photographic portfolio . Times photographer Gail Fisher also won first-place awards in the best-pictorial and best-portrait categories . Other Times first-place winners in photography were Don Tormey for best news photograph , Mark Boster , best feature photograph , Kari Renee Hall , best photographic essay , and Gary Ambrose , best photographic illustration . Other Times staffers who picked up first-place awards include Eric Schine for best business story ; Mark Landsbaum for best column or commentary ; Dianne Klein , best story on law ; Richard Beene , best story on social issues ; Don Angel , best editorial , and Michael L. Boehm , best entertainment story . Times news editor Dave Galloway won a first-place award for best news-page layout , while editors Chuck Nigash won for best feature-page layout and Mike Spencer for best headline portfolio . Register writers Larry Welborn , Dan Weikel and Donna Wares took top honors in the special government watchdog category , while Edward Humes won the investigative reporting award and took first place for beat coverage . Other first-place winners for the Register were Chris Knap , best story on public affairs ; Marla Cone , best story on science and technology ; Jon Lansner , best series or package of stories ; Martin J. Smith , best sports story ; Jeff Goertzen , best graphics portfolio , and Kevin T. Boyd , best informational graphic . Times staff members who won second-place awards and honorable mentions were Steven Churm , Michael Flagg and George Frank for a story on public affairs ; Marcida Dodson , magazine story ; Dennis McLellan , science and technology ; Jeffrey Perlman , Marcida Dodson , John Spano and Laura Kurtzman , for a series or package of stories ; Steven Churm , Anne Roark and Steve Low , in the sports category ; Peter Harrigan , news-page layout ; Steven D. Nelson , feature-page layout and informational graphic , and Tom Penix , informational graphic . Also winning awards were Dana Parsons , feature story ; Bill Billiter , beat coverage ; Joseph N. Bell , column or commentary ; James V. Granelli , law story ; Dianne Klein , public affairs story ; Richard Beene , Dianne Klein , Maria L. La Ganga , Leslie Berkman and Michael Flagg , series or package of stories ; Lynn Smith , social issues ; Pat Gerber , sports story ; Leavett Biles , graphics portfolio , and Steve Lopez , illustration . Other Times photographers who won awards were Richard Koehler , news photograph and sports photograph ; Mark Boster , portrait , pictorial , photographic portfolio , photographic illustration ; Don Tormey , sports photograph , photographic portfolio , portrait ; Gary Ambrose , pictorial , feature photograph ; Henry DiRocco , news photograph ; Don Kelsen , photographic essay ; Gail Fisher , photographic essay , photographic portfolio . Other Register writers winning awards were Larry Welborn , news story ; James V. Grimaldi , Janine Anderson , Steve Eddy and Carroll Lachnit , feature story ; Susan Peterson , beat coverage ; Martin J. Smith , science or technology story and social issues ; Gary A. Warner and Jane Glenn Haas , series or package of stories ; Melissa Balmain Weiner , feature story ; Kevin T. Boyd , illustration . Orange Coast Daily Pilot reporter Greg Klerkx captured a first-place award for best news story in a publication with less than 100,000 circulation . Pilot reporter Robert Hyndman won the second-place award in the same category . The Daily Pilot also won three second-place awards in general categories , with Tom Tait winning for editorial , Robert Hyndman , entertainment , and Bob van Eyken , law story . Other winners of second-place or honorable-mention awards were Orange Coast Magazine staffers Scott R. Hays , Sharon Cohoon , Robert Ray , Eve Belson , Leslie Freidson Lawicki , and Daniel Fort ; Newport Center News reporter Tom Vasich ; Laguna Niguel News reporter Maureen O'Haren ; William Melton , of the La Habra Daily Star-Progress ; Greg Hardesty , Orange County Business First ; Peter Hund , Orange County Business Journal ; Curt Seeden , San Clemente News , and William Lobdell , World Trade Magazine . First-place winners in the public relations awards categories were Tracy Childs , Nelson/Ralston/Robb Communication , best news release ; Jim Carnett , Orange Coast College Information , best feature release ; Koll Centerlines , by Patricia Johnson , best internal publication ; and UCI Journal , by Linda Granell , best external publication . Other public relations winners were Randall Black and Colleen Bently-Adler of UCI ; Mary Jane Foster , Saddleback Hospital ; Elaine Beno , of Dale Eastman ; Kay Carver , Roundup ; Bob Nelson , Lee Ann Buchanan and Adrienne Miller , Heads Up , and Yvonne M. Martin , Business Update .