Michigan doctors have succeeded in using genetically altered cells to act as an internal Band-Aid , a technique that eventually might be used to prevent atherosclerotic lesions from worsening , it was reported here Monday . Although the work so far has been done only in animals , and with genes that do not produce biologically active products , the research represents a leap toward gene therapy to prevent heart attacks and strokes , the president of the American Heart Assn . told science writers . The Michigan work is generating much excitement among cardiovascular researchers because it `` points out to them the potential for broadly moving their field and other fields forward , '' Dr. Myron L. Weisfeldt said . Dr. Elizabeth G. Nabel , assistant professor of medicine at the University of Michigan , reported at the meeting that her research group had used a common cardiovascular technique -- balloon angioplasty -- to insert genetically engineered cells into the arteries of Yucatan mini-pigs . The group infected endothelial cells -- which line the interior of the blood vessels -- that had been taken from the pigs earlier with a retrovirus that had itself been altered with a bacterial gene . Because a retrovirus inserts its own genetic code into infected cells , the enzyme-producing bacterial gene became part of the pig cells ' genetic machinery . The altered cells were inserted into the pig artery through a balloon catheter . There they established a healing layer of endothelial cells over the atherosclerotic lesion , which is an accumulation of fat-filled cells on the artery wall . The layer successfully produced the bacterial enzyme , showing that a foreign gene could work in this way , Nabel said . Aware of problems that other proposed gene therapies have had in obtaining results , Nabel was cautiously optimistic . `` We have established the feasibility of using endothelial cells as factories for artery repair , '' Nabel said . The endothelial cells eventually might be modified to secrete anti-clotting proteins to prevent blockage of the artery at atherosclerotic plaque sites . Noting that plaques themselves produce substances that promote their own growth , Nabel said the endothelial Band-Aid might also contain genes to block these growth promoters . Since endothelial cells are in organs throughout the body , she added , these designer cells might even be engineered to produce anti-cancer drugs at tumor sites . Still , she called such applications `` pie in the sky , '' and said she did not expect the research to bear clinical fruit for perhaps 20 years . Part of the reason for that is the extensive safety monitoring that would have to be done before such techniques could be used in humans , she said . Retroviruses would have to be shown unable to cause harmful infection before they could be used in humans . The inserted genes would also need to have only a localized effect , so they would not harm other body systems . Weisfeldt , however , said he thought that if the technique proves promising , it might be usable early on in people for whom there is no other hope of survival . For instance , heart transplant patients often develop life-threatening atherosclerosis a few years after transplant as a result of the operation . Endothelial cells have become a prime target for genetic engineers because their location inside the blood vessel ensures that hormones or other biological agents they produce will be distributed throughout the body . They are also easier to work with than bone marrow cells , which had previously been the target of choice . Geneticists around the country are already experimenting in animals with altered endothelial cells that deliver CD4 , a protein that blocks the AIDS virus ; a clotting factor to prevent excessive bleeding in hemophilia ; adenosine deaminate , which is missing in children with certain genetic disorders of the immune system ; and von Willebrand 's factor , which cures another genetic bleeding disorder . Researchers speculate the technique could also be used to produce tissue plasminogen activator , which would prevent the formation of blood clots that cause strokes and heart attacks , and even insulin for diabetics . Most researchers agree that several years will elapse before attempts are made at human therapy by genetic engineering . To date , genetically engineered cells have been introduced into only a handful of humans as part of an anti-cancer therapy devised at the National Cancer Institute . Last May , researchers there used genetic engineering techniques to insert markers into white blood cells that are used in therapy of malignant melanoma , a particularly severe form of skin cancer , to help track the cells through the body . A total of 10 patients are to be treated , and so far no ill effects from the genetically engineered cells have been observed . REPAIRING INJURED ARTERIES In miniature pigs , scientists at the University of Michigan used this two-ballon technique to insert replacements for the injured cell layer that normally lines the arteries , but which is damaged in atherosclerosis . Because the inserted cells successfully produced an enzyme that they had been genetically altered to make , the researchers see the angioplasty technique -- already used to unblock arteries in humans -- as a potential way to both repair injured artery walls and make them produce lesion-inhibiting proteins that would reverse or prevent further atherosclerosis .