Amid styling gels and hair spray cans , a small decorative box sits atop the front counter at the Act 1 Hair Salon in Anaheim with a sign asking for donations . `` Please help for Wendy 's husband , '' begins the note stuck on the container . Manicurist Wendy Shaw 's husband , Daniel , who turned 27 this month , has leukemia , and a bone marrow transplant might prolong his life . But the insurance policy from his employer , the CIGNA insurance corporation , does not cover the expensive search for bone marrow donors unless doctors approve . And so far , doctors have said that Shaw , among other things , is not strong enough to undergo such a transplant . Dr. Eddie Hu , who has treated Shaw in recent weeks , said he will consider requesting a donor search when Shaw 's condition improves . But other experts contend that a search for a donor should begin as soon as the cancer is detected . `` There are many centers who would say that the day you are diagnosed , you should start looking for a donor , although they may not do the transplant right away , '' said Robertson Parkman , head of the Division of Research Immunology at Children 's Hospital of Los Angeles and a professor of pediatrics at USC Medical Center . However , Parkman said there may be a problem with launching a donor search for every leukemia patient because the number of requests would overload the system . He said requests for donors should be limited to patients without matching siblings and in cases where chemotherapy is `` not likely to be successful . '' Shaw , a medical supply clerk with CIGNA , has no siblings for a possible bone marrow match . And the hundreds of nickels and dimes that have filled the container at the hair salon are hardly enough to cover the estimated $ 10,000 cost of a marrow search . A CIGNA spokesman said Shaw 's employee insurance will pay for the bone marrow search when his doctor authorizes it . Insurance is already paying all of Shaw 's hospital expenses , and it will cover the transplant operation , estimated to cost between $ 150,000 and $ 200,000 , company spokesman Del Bowman said . In a tiny hospital room at St. Vincent Medical Center in Los Angeles , Shaw energetically talked about the final days he and his 26-year-old wife spent together before he was hospitalized nearly eight weeks ago . On one day the couple drove around hillside neighborhoods in north Orange County looking at homes . `` We just spent the day driving around , just dreaming and being together , '' said Shaw , who appears healthy and fit except for the loss of his hair as the result of radiation treatments . `` I love the sun and just do n't get it in here , '' he said , pointing at the small window in his room . `` I 'm so ready to get out of here . '' LISA MASCARO