Quick , name two ways to reduce the risk of high blood pressure . We 're betting you know the answer : Lose weight , if necessary , and cut back on salt . But if we asked you to name a third measure , the answer might not come as easily , even though it 's just as simple : Increase intake of potassium . This advice comes backed by a special committee of the National Research Council , which recommends that adults consume 3,500 milligrams of potassium a day . Some groups are already eating that much ; others are not . Recent estimates show that 15- to 20-year-olds take in 3,400 milligrams daily . Diets of an urban white population provided 2,500 milligrams , while studies of black Americans have found intakes as low as 1,000 milligrams a day . Sodium may get more press , but our bodies contain twice as much potassium -- just over half-a-pound . Most is found within the cells . Together with sodium , it regulates the salt and acid-base balance of the fluid environment of healthy cells . The amount outside the cells , though smaller , is equally important , contributing to transmission of nerve impulses , control of skeletal muscle contractions and maintenance of normal blood pressure . Dietary deficiency does n't usually occur . It can develop when large amounts are lost by prolonged vomiting , chronic diarrhea or laxative abuse . Excessive losses are also linked to certain diseases and use of some diuretics . Patients on such medications often are advised to take them with orange juice or a banana , both packed with potassium . Over several decades , evidence has mounted that eating more such potassium-rich fruits and vegetables may benefit not only hypertension patients but the population at large . Although not always consistent , some studies indicate that low levels of dietary sodium coupled with high intake of potassium may reduce blood pressure . And high potassium intake -- meaning at least 3,500 milligrams daily -- may by itself protect against death from stroke . In one study , it was estimated that an increase of just 400 milligrams a day of potassium , over a 12-year period , led to a 40 % decrease in incidence of stroke-related death . Why this happens is not yet known . But until research provides the answer , we 're left with the recommendation to take in 3,500 milligrams a day . The next question is , does your diet meet the test ? Bear this in mind : Fruits and vegetables , unless processed with salt , are naturally low in sodium , and for this reason are often mentioned as preferred potassium sources . Yet most other foods also contain the mineral . A cup of milk has 355 milligrams , a slice of whole-wheat bread , 63 milligrams , and an ounce of hamburger , 81 milligrams . Now let 's run through a typical day 's menu . Breakfast might include four ounces of orange juice ( 238 milligrams ) , a cup of oatmeal ( 146 milligrams ) , three-quarters cup milk ( 266 milligrams ) and coffee ( 65 milligrams ) . The total is 715 milligrams : 20 % of the target . A bag lunch could be a sandwich made with whole-wheat bread ( 326 milligrams ) and two tablespoons of peanut butter ( 200 milligrams ) , along with carrot sticks ( 145 milligrams ) , a glass of milk ( 355 milligrams ) and a fresh pear ( 260 milligrams ) for dessert . Lunch thus gives you 1,286 milligrams , or 36 % more . A dinner , consisting of four ounces of lean steak ( 396 milligrams ) , a large baked potato ( 844 milligrams ) , a medium stalk of broccoli ( 293 milligrams ) , a glass of skim milk ( 355 milligrams ) and a cup of pineapple chunks ( 266 milligrams ) adds 2,154 milligrams , bringing the day 's tally to 4,155 milligrams , even without snacks that might round out this bare-bones menu . Clearly , a menu planned with an eye to general principles of good nutrition can easily provide 3,500 milligrams of potassium or more . Even if your meal does n't include such potassium powerhouses as baked potato , there are alternatives . Dried apricots , prunes , cooked kidney beans , celery , spinach , avocado and winter squash all provide 300 milligrams to 600 milligrams of potassium per half-cup . One rung down are bananas , tomatoes , orange juice , cooked lentils , Brussels sprouts and cantaloupe , with 200 milligrams to 275 milligrams per half-cup . Other fruits and vegetables contain 70 milligrams to 170 milligrams per half-cup -- and we often eat servings larger than that anyway . There 's no reason to suggest that taking potassium supplements will ward off hypertension . Yet a diet rich in potassium might be of benefit , and this possibility provides one more reason to eat plenty of fruits and vegetables . Such a diet dates back to that of prehistoric hunter-gatherers , who depended heavily on potassium-rich roots , fruits , tubers , nuts , grains and seeds for calories . Read Ingredient List on Turkey Products Question : Is it true that some turkey products have skin ground up in them ? Answer : Some do , and that adds considerably to the fat content of the product . One way to tell whether the ground poultry you 're buying contains skin as well as flesh is by inspecting the ingredients list . If you find the words turkey meat or chicken meat , you can assume you 're getting the lean part only . If the list includes plain terms like turkey or chicken , or even chicken breast , then the producer may , within the limits of government regulation , add ground skin to the product . Q : I buy sunflower seeds in bulk , so there is no labeling information . My calorie chart says that two ounces of the seeds contain 170 calories . Does that mean two ounces including the shell or just the edible seeds ? A : That figure includes the shell . Two ounces of the edible seeds would contain about 325 calories . If you do n't have ready access to a scale , you may find it more useful to think in terms of household measures . A cup of seeds in the shell , which yields about one-third cup of edible kernels , provides 255 calories . As you may know , sunflower seeds are high in fat -- an attribute useful to birds and squirrels trying to survive the winter but not always so desirable for humans . Protein and carbohydrate account for a little more than 30 % of the calories ; the rest are from fat . Sunflower seeds contain some B vitamins and are a good source of iron . They also provide a bit of calcium , although in that department they 're no competitor for milk . Q : I 've read that a nursing mother should consume about 500 calories a day more than normal during the first six months of her infant 's life . What is the basis for that statement ? A : On average , milk from well-nourished mothers contains about 70 calories per 100 milliliters . It 's estimated that the conversion of calories consumed ( when the mother eats ) to calories in milk is , on average , about 80 % efficient -- although this varies widely , ranging from 76 % to as high as 94 % . Thus , during the first six months , a woman typically produces an average of about three cups of milk a day . So it takes an average of about 640 calories a day to meet the demand of producing milk . How , then , is the gap between the recommendation and the actual need explained ? The generally recommended energy allowance of 500 calories assumes that the mother has laid down some energy reserves during her pregnancy , anywhere from 15,400 to 23,000 calories worth . It 's expected that these fat stores will provide the caloric deficit from 100 to 150 calories a day for the first six months . Obviously , women who were underweight during pregnancy or whose weight drops too much while they are nursing will need to raise their caloric intake to meet the increased demands . Q : Several years ago , I purchased three copper pans , all lined with nickel . While cleaning up after a recent dinner party , a friend inquired about the lining material . When I told her it was nickel , she expressed concern about its safety , gently implying that unwittingly I might have been poisoning my guests . Are nickel-lined pans harmful in some way ? A : No . While both tin and nickel are used to line copper pans , nickel offers two advantages : 1 ) it is more durable , and will outlast tin ; 2 ) it is more heat-resistant . In practical terms , that means that if an empty tin-lined pan is inadvertently left on a heated burner , the lining will be destroyed rather quickly but a nickel lining will not be so easily hurt . From a safety standpoint there really is no difference . There is no evidence that either nickel or tin will migrate into the food in harmful amounts . Besides , both metals are poorly absorbed and readily excreted .