QUESTION : Would you explain how the new scroll compressor-type of central air conditioner works . Is it really more energy-efficiency and more maintenance-free as the contractors tell me ? ANSWER : The most recent major design innovation for central air conditioners is a high-efficiency scroll compressor in place of a standard piston-type compressor . A new scroll compressor air conditioner can cut your electric bills significantly and minimize maintenance costs . Several air conditioner manufacturers are now using scroll compressors with seasonal energy efficiency ratios ( SEER ) up to 12 . Your old unit may have a SEER as low as 6 . SEER relates the amount of cooling output of a central air conditioner to the amount of electricity it uses . By its design , the scroll compressor is very reliable . Unlike conventional compressors with many moving parts , pistons , valves , seals , etc. , a scroll compressor has only four moving parts . As it gets older , the few moving parts of a scroll compressor actually wear in and operate better . It is also more tolerant of foreign matter and fluids in the system . Without the pistons and valves used in a standard compressor , a scroll compressor operates more quietly and more vibration-free . This is an advantage both for you and your neighbors . The operating principle of a scroll compressor is simple . Two spiral-shaped members fit together . One remains stationary , while the other orbits relative to it . This creates gas pockets which gradually decrease in size to compress the Freon . Since several pockets of Freon are compressed simultaneously in the scroll members , it produces a smooth and nearly continuous compression cycle . In contrast , a standard piston compressor produces fewer and larger compression pulses per cycle . When you select a new central air conditioner , have your contractor do a detailed heat gain analysis for your house . Many use computers and sophisticated programs . An improperly sized central air conditioner not only wastes electricity , but does n't provide the best comfort level . You can write to me for Utility Bills Update No . 042 , showing a list of manufacturers , model numbers and SEER 's of air conditioners using scroll compressors , a chart showing the electricity saving by installing a high-efficiency unit and more detailed information on the scroll compressor . Please include $ 1 and a self-addressed envelope . Send your requests to James Dulley , c/o Los Angles Times , 6906 Royalgreen Drive , Cincinnati , Ohio 45244 . Alarms Required to Have Battery , Power Q : I have heard that some areas require smoke alarms that are powered by both batteries and regular house electricity . Since these operate continuously , will they be expensive to operate ? A : The amount of current usage is very low and the operating cost is negligible . The reason for requiring two power sources , batteries and house current , is that people often let the batteries run down . They plan to replace them , but never get around to doing it , and then they forget . Without power , the smoke alarm provides no protection . To keep people from removing the batteries to avoid annoying false alarms when cooking , some new smoke alarms offer a hush control . This allows you to press a button to temporarily decrease the sensitivity of the alarm . It resets to normal sensitivity automatically . Letters and questions to Dulley , a Cincinnati-based engineering consultant , may be sent to James Dulley , Los Angeles Times , 6906 Royalgreen Drive , Cincinnati , Ohio 45244 .