Cal State Fullerton 's baseball team stepped slightly out of character Saturday with a 5-2 victory over Stanford in a nonconference game in front of about 800 at Titan Field . Fullerton came in with one stolen base in its first three games but stole two against Stanford , both leading to runs . The Titans also had a runner picked off and two more thrown out trying to steal . `` We were trying to be a little more aggressive than normally , '' Fullerton Coach Larry Cochell said . `` We wanted to put the pressure on the defense by trying to make things happen . '' The Titans ' final bit of aggressiveness resulted in their last run in the sixth inning . With one out , Rod Klopfer singled and moved to second on a balk . He stole third and continued home when Stanford third baseman Roger Burnett had the throw from the catcher go off his glove for an error . Klopfer 's run gave Fullerton a 5-1 lead . Fullerton had scored a pair of runs in the second to lead , 2-1 , and two more in the third for a 4-1 lead . For seven innings , the lead was well protected by starter Huck Flenner , a sophomore left-hander , who allowed only one run . But in the eighth , Flenner tired . After his second walk of the inning , he was replaced by Sam Colarusso , a junior right-hander from Orange Coast College . Colarusso walked Tim Griffin to load the bases with two outs , then threw a wild pitch to allow a run . He fell behind David Holbrook , three balls and a strike before getting him to fly to Trevor Neighbors in right field to end the inning . Colarusso got a pair of strikeouts in the ninth as he retired Stanford for his first save . Flenner ( 1-0 ) allowed four hits and four walks and had seven strikeouts for Fullerton ( 3-1 ) . The first sign of Fullerton 's willingness to run came in the second when Ralph Ramirez stole second on a broken hit-and-run play . It was the first steal for Ramirez at Fullerton . Ramirez , a senior from Orange Coast College , did not steal a base in 42 games last season . Ramirez scored from second when Mate Borgogno lined a bad-hop double to center . Bobby Jones time an off-speed pitch from Stanford starter and loser Ben Keyser and hit it well over the left-field fence for his first home run of the season to open the third inning . Neighbors followed with a single and later scored on a groundout by Ramirez to give Fullerton a 4-1 lead . Rich Gonzales had three hits for Fullerton , which had nine . Stanford ( 4-5 ) had four hits . The Titans will try to complete a sweep of Stanford in the three-game series at 5 p.m. today at Fullerton .