An impressive array of black community leaders , celebrities and politicians -- led by the Rev . Jesse Jackson -- gathered in Hollywood on Sunday evening to pay tribute to Don Jackson , the Hawthorne police sergeant and self-styled crusader against alleged police abuse of minorities . More than 500 supporters , who jammed a ballroom at the Hollywood Roosevelt , donated more than $ 15,000 to Don Jackson , who is on disability leave . The Rev . Jackson , who earlier in the day joined striking Eastern Airline mechanics in a picket line at Los Angeles International Airport , called Don Jackson `` a hero , and the messenger before the storm . '' Assemblywoman Maxine Waters ( D-Los Angeles ) organized the tribute to Jackson , who gained national recognition in January , when an NBC camera crew filmed him as a Long Beach police officer apparently pushed him through a plate glass window . State Sen. Diane Watson ( D-Los Angeles ) called Jackson `` an ordinary person who has done extraordinary things . . . . So often when you go out a limb there is no tree there to support you . We are your tree . No one is going to mess with you , because when they mess with you , they mess with us . '' Life in Possible Danger Waters told the gathering that Jackson 's life could be in danger and that they should `` keep their eyes out for him . '' Don Jackson , 31 , has been criticized as a dangerous provocateur by police in Long Beach and in other Los Angeles-area cities , where he has launched his so-called `` sting '' operations . Don Jackson , whose birthday was Sunday , said the party -- which reached revival-meeting fervor when Dionne Warwick sang `` That 's What Friends Are For '' -- would reinvigorate him as he prepares to stand trial Wednesday on a charge of obstructing a police officer in the Long Beach incident . `` I 'm overwhelmed , '' Jackson said . `` I 've been struggling with this issue for over seven years and I never thought I would see what I 'm seeing today -- support from the people who I am working for . . . . '' The Rev . Jackson ended his 20-minute speech by urging the crowd to make donations to Jackson , who has received just a fraction of his full pay since he went on stress disability leave after several alleged incidents of racism within the Hawthorne department . Blames Reagan The Rev . Jackson said the brutality of which Don Jackson has complained had its roots in the Reagan Administration and `` eight years of an absence of moral leadership in the White House , which has put a curse on our nation . `` If you have n't been brutalized in this environment , it 's only because your number has n't come up in the lottery , '' he said . `` President Bush should exalt you , '' the clergyman told Don Jackson . `` You 're the best America has . ''