Capt . Will C. Rogers III was awarded the Legion of Merit on Saturday , a top military honor , as he stepped down from command of the Vincennes , a guided-missile cruiser . He has been reassigned to shore duty in what Navy officials describe as a routine transfer . The Vincennes created an international furor last July when it mistakenly shot down an Iranian airliner in the Persian Gulf during a firefight with seven Iranian gunboats , killing all 290 people on the plane . Speaking from the deck of the ship , Rogers lashed out against the `` rabid ideology '' of terrorists and the `` lack of courage '' of those who give in to terrorist actions . Ovation for Wife His wife , Sharon , seated among 500 spectators on the pier next to the ship , drew a standing ovation from the crowd Saturday as she accepted a bouquet of red roses from the Navy at the change-of-command ceremony . Last March , she survived a suspected terrorist bomb attack as she drove to her teaching job in La Jolla . Several days later , she was fired by administrators of the exclusive La Jolla Country Day School , who feared her presence posed a security threat to the children . Federal investigators have speculated that the pipe bombs that destroyed her van may have been planted in retaliation for the downing of the civilian airliner . The ceremony took place amid unusually tight security at the 32nd Street Naval Station . Only invited guests were allowed on the base , and all had to pass through two security checks and a metal detector . The Rogerses remain under the constant protection of the Naval Investigative Service . Pupils as Guests Among the guests were a number of children from the fourth-grade class Sharon Rogers taught at La Jolla Country Day School . Giggling and smiling , the children gathered around her before the ceremony . Sharon Rogers has not returned to the school since the bombing incident and has reached a $ 135,000 settlement with its administrators . Rogers called his wife `` a very brave and courageous lady , '' and described her reaction on the morning her van exploded at a La Jolla intersection . `` She literally rode the fireball out of the vehicle , sprinted to the curb , combed the shrapnel from her hair and asked a construction worker to call and inform me that she had experienced a minor mechanical difficulty , '' Rogers said . `` When I arrived , she was most concerned , as her lesson plans were in flames and she was going to be late for school . '' Posted to Point Loma Rogers has been reassigned as commander of the Tactical Development and Training Group based at Point Loma . He will be replaced on the Vincennes by Capt . Robert B. Lynch , who previously was assigned to the Naval Military Personnel Command . Rogers was given the Legion of Merit award for his performance as commanding officer of the Vincennes , to which he was assigned in April , 1987 . A letter written on behalf of President Bush by Navy Sec . H. Lawrence Garrett III described Rogers ' `` superb professionalism , confidence and exceptional leadership and dedication to excellence . '' During the ship 's tour in the Persian Gulf , Rogers ' `` tactical skills and calm direction enabled his crew to successfully engage seven heavily armed high-speed Iranian surface craft '' attacking the Vincennes in `` confined and confused waters , '' the letter stated . `` As a result , five craft were destroyed and two retreated . '' The letter made no mention of the Iranian airliner , which Rogers ordered shot down that day in the mistaken belief that it was an Iranian fighter plane . Rogers and his crew were cleared of any responsibility for the mistake in a Defense Department investigation last year .