Eric Show , three weeks before he will surely be the Padres ' opening-day starting pitcher , has begun complaining about lower back pains caused by what was diagnosed in January as a bulging disc . Although Show has proven he can pitch well in his condition -- he was outstanding Monday in pitching a three-hit shutout over six innings against the Milwaukee Brewers -- he says he is in pain at other times and will wonder about the back until it is tested over a full-game situation . He threw about 60 pitches Monday . He would normally throw around 110 . `` It 's fine now , but the minute it affects my motion or my delivery or any of that , I 'm going to see what needs to be done , '' Show said Monday . `` I will pitch with pain -- I 've pitched with fractured fingers , broken toes . But I will not pitch where it is hurting the team or myself . '' Although Show said an option would be the same kind of surgery performed on San Francisco quarterback Joe Montana -- `` I could be back in four to six weeks , good as new , '' he said -- his doctor said such talk is premature . `` His is not a surgical lesion , that 's not where it 's at right now , '' said Dr. Daniel Denenberg , a San Diego orthopedic surgeon who performed a test which revealed Show 's condition . Denenberg said the bulging disc could have been there for quite some time , perhaps even throughout last summer when Show led the Padres with a 16-11 record and 3.26 earned-run average . `` Our findings are that the disc is irritated , but it 's not something that just occurred , '' Denenberg said . `` It 's been there for a while , and been compatible with his well-being . He 's obviously performed with it . `` It just started bothering him , so we took a look . The thing now is to wait and see . '' Sometimes the waiting is easy , as in Monday 's game , in which Show put up the best numbers of any Padre starter this year , striking out four and walking two . The Padres wound up losing his 4-0 lead when reliever Greg Booker put up the spring 's worst numbers , allowing eight runs ( seven earned ) in two innings in an eventual 8-4 loss . `` If Show 's back is hurt and he throws like that , maybe his back should stay hurt , '' Manager Jack McKeon said . `` Seriously , Show looks fine to us , and we are not worried . '' Other times , though , the waiting is hard . `` I felt great today , '' Show said . `` But tomorrow , I 'll be hurting . I 'll be walking around like . . . `` He stuck out his hand as if holding an imaginary cane and began hobbling around his locker . `` On certain movements , it just hurts , '' Show said . `` Like bending over . '' Show first complained of the soreness in January , and underwent tests that revealed the problem , but caused little worry . Show noted , `` About 80 % of the people in this country have bulging discs , and it 's no problem for most of them . '' Both he and his agent , Steve Greenberg , were asked about the back during the first week of camp , and both denied any serious problems . `` I thought the soreness would go away , '' Show said , `` but it has n't . '' Yet teammates recently noticed Show complaining of the pain during everyday situations , such as riding the team bus . Show said his problem now is believing that pain wo n't occur on the field . `` I 've got to get rid of it as far as the psychological aspects are concerned , '' Show said . `` I 've got to go six or seven innings and see if it 's fine . '' And if it 's not fine ? `` I 'll do my best to ignore it , '' Show said , `` but only to a point where I ca n't ignore it . '' Pat Dobson , Padre pitching coach , said that as far as Show 's position in the rotation was concerned , Dobson also would ignore the back pains . `` I check with him about it all the time , but it does n't seem to bother him once he gets loose , so I wo n't do anything until he comes to me , '' Dobson said . `` I think maybe it 's tough on him the day after he pitches , and I bet that if he gets involved in any long innings in the cold , it could be a problem . But we 'll just get a hot pack on him while he 's on the bench and that should take care of it . '' Dobson and the other coaches met with McKeon over dinner Monday night to discuss roster moves and , among other things , the opening day starter April 3 in San Diego against San Francisco . By virtue of his career-best performance last season , Show was a lock for the job the minute he stepped into camp , and still is a lock . He has looked decent in all three spring outings , going 1-0 with a 3.75 ERA . `` Do I want to be the opening day starter ? Sure , '' Show said . `` Somebody has to start the season so , sure , why not ? '' If Show 's season in interrupted because of back problems , minor league star Greg Harris , who was 2-0 with a 1.50 ERA in three appearances with the Padres last fall , appears ready for a shot at a rotation he now can not crack . Padre Notes Although Eric Show 's back condition could change things , pitching coach Pat Dobson revealed Monday that the club might go with only nine pitchers instead of the standard 10 . `` Why not ? If we have our starters going so many innings like last year , what do we need the extra bullpen man for ? '' Dobson asked . Such a switch would allow the Padres to keep an extra utility man -- maybe backup shortstop candidates Mike Brumley and Gary Green could both make the team . Green was given an inning at third base Monday . The losing pitcher could be rookie Greg Harris , who is scheduled to make the team in the bullpen even though he is a starter , just for the big-league exposure and in case a starter were injured . . . . Monday 's loss dropped the Padres ' spring record to 6-4-1 while shooting Greg Booker 's spring ERA to 20.25 -- nine earned runs in four innings . Carmelo Martinez hit his third homer of the spring , a two-run shot in the fifth . . . . The Padres play two more games in the Phoenix area before returning to Yuma for their remaining nine home games begining Friday at 7:05 against San Francisco . McKeon has scheduled a `` B '' game with the Giants beginning at 3 p.m. Friday at Desert Sun Stadium .