Environmental Protection Agency data released today by a House panel chairman indicate that 205 industrial plants in 37 states release enough toxic chemicals to pose a severe cancer risk . Thirteen plants in California were on the list . EPA officials cautioned that while the overall cancer danger is serious , the information includes partial and old data that does not represent `` credible estimates of risk '' for individual facilities cited . Risk estimates for those exposed are a thousand-fold greater than the cancer risk level most policy makers consider acceptable , said Rep. Henry A. Waxman ( D-Calif. ) , who released the figures . High Risk Only one plant in the nation , a Texaco refinery at Port Neches , Tex. , was listed as posing a cancer risk of at least 1 in 10 for each person given maximum exposure . Two California plants , Simpson Paper Co. of Fairhaven and Unocal at La Mirada , were in the second section of the list for posing a cancer risk of at least 1 in 100 but less than 10 in 100 . There were 45 such plants listed nationwide . The third category of plants with a cancer risk of at least 1 in 1,000 but less than 1 in 100 for each person with maximum exposure includes 11 California plants : Dow Chemical , Pittsburg ( listed twice because of risks from two chemicals ) ; Louisiana Pacific , Samoa ; Louisiana Pacific , Antioch ; Simpson Paper , Anderson ; Shell-Carlson , Los Angeles ; American Pharmaceutical , Irwindale ; Cal-Compack Food , Santa Ana ; Gilroy Foods Inc. , Gilroy ; McCormick & Co. , Salinas ; Micro-Biotrol , Vernon , and Santa Maria Chili , Santa Maria . A risk estimate of 1 in 1,000 means that one person out of 1,000 could be expected to contract cancer from maximum exposure to a single pollutant . Waxman , chairman of the House Energy and Commerce environment subcommittee , agreed that the list could change because the figures are preliminary . Nonetheless , he said , the numbers represent a `` stunning demonstration of the urgency of the public health threat '' from the now-unregulated toxic emissions , and he told reporters that the public has a right to the information . The EPA said the new , preliminary list is the first of its kind , although Waxman noted that two previous studies found cancer rates two to four times the national average near some major chemical facilities . There are strong indications that the risk is even worse because the data are so limited , Waxman said . For instance , the information only measures cancer risks , but not other potential hazards such as birth defects , nervous system damage or respiratory disease . Waxman coupled release of the data with introduction of legislation to control toxic releases from industrial sources and motor vehicles ; to prevent accidental releases ; to protect the Great Lakes , which have been seriously damaged by airborne toxic chemicals , and to control emissions from small businesses .