Having toiled in the rock biz since the heyday of the lower-Manhattan music scene 13 years ago , and having weathered a messy divorce , messier managerial problems and a long battle with drugs , there 's no question that Willy DeVille is a soul survivor . What has n't survived is the soul . At the Coach House in San Juan Capistrano Sunday night , backed by a new Mink DeVille band ( with no familiar faces ) , he was still singing about the aching sadness of failed love -- and thanks to his vocal gifts , you could still feel the ache . But these days he casts his tales as airy ballads or remarkably feisty rock romps . The R & B -- especially the swaggering soul -- around which he built his career is pretty much gone . This is not bad , nor is it very surprising . Two years ago , when he dissolved Mink DeVille and recorded the solo album `` Miracle '' ( produced and featuring guitar-playing by Dire Straits maestro Mark Knopfler ) , his intention was to get away from the stylized Mink DeVille sound . He felt that he had painted himself into a corner with the R & B and soul orientation , the smoky sax and other musical elements . With his presentation at the Coach House , he was merely staying true to his new musical direction . And it worked enormously well . He still managed to hurl a few curve balls , though , both sonic and visual . Cruising on stage as the band lit into a fairly hoppin ' , boppin ' take on `` Lilly 's Daddy 's Cadillac '' -- rail thin , occasionally flashing a gold tooth from his reptilian face -- he was decked out in some kind of matador jacket , leather pants , boots , hoop earrings and poofy black pompadour . We are n't exactly talking GQ material here . But we are talking one of the coolest guys in rock , and an eminently engaging performer . DeVille smoking a cigarette is more interesting than most rockers going through their on-stage gyrations . More importantly , clear-eyed and in fine voice , Willy delivered the goods . Whether performing tunes from `` Miracle '' such as `` Heart and Soul '' -- an atmospheric piece with a Latin lilt , over which he sang a naked pledge of undying love and devotion -- or re-arranged versions of early classics , Willy was on top of his game , investing every word with seemingly heartfelt emotion . He still comes across as a romantic who 's not only incurable but absolutely not interested in being cured . He also injected many of the numbers with some stinging guitar licks . On an initially unrecognizable rendition of Moon Martin 's `` Cadillac Walk '' ( much bigger , denser and more booming than Mink DeVille 's recorded version ) , he cut loose with some wailing slide guitar . It was that kind of night -- full of surprises , mostly pleasant ones . To those who openly pine for the Mink DeVille sound and style of yesteryear , Willy would probably lean forward , flash a gold-toothed grin and say , `` Tough . '' We 'd have to agree .