A Canadian nanny whose testimony helped convict the adopted son of a millionaire tobacco executive on a sex charge involving a 3-year-old girl has been arrested as she allegedly tried to collect $ 200,000 not to show up at a retrial , the FBI said Thursday . Isabel Anderson , who testified that she saw Luis Gillespie raping the child in his adoptive father 's Hancock Park mansion in June , 1985 , was taken into custody in Seattle on Wednesday as she collected the money from someone she thought was sent by a defense attorney , authorities said . The unidentified person was an FBI agent . As it turned out , there will be no retrial . The U.S. attorney 's office , seeing its primary witness against Gillespie apparently discredited , filed for dismissal of the charges against him . `` It would have made a retrial extremely difficult , '' Assistant U.S. Atty . Julie Blackshaw said . Arrested with Anderson , the FBI said , was Vancouver , Canada , resident Kelley Peter Wiebe , 29 , who was accused of being Anderson 's lookout for the meeting . Gillespie was convicted in Los Angeles federal court in 1987 of transporting his godchild from his native Ecuador for immoral purposes . He was sentenced to 10 years in prison . Last July , however , the 9th U.S . Circuit Court of Appeal reversed the conviction , ruling that U.S. District Judge David Kenyon erred by allowing prejudicial and irrelevant testimony that the defendant and his adoptive father , David Gillespie , had a homosexual relationship . The appellate court ordered a new trial . In the meantime , however , Gillespie served two years in prison , because he was not allowed to remain free on bail pending appeal . According to the joint announcement by Steven L. Pomerantz and Lawrence G. Lawler , special agents in charge of the Seattle and Los Angeles FBI offices , respectively , Anderson initially demanded $ 500,000 not to testify at a retrial . The FBI would say only that she made her offer to a `` defense attorney '' and that the amount `` was later reduced '' to $ 200,000 . It was not made clear whether the lower amount was her suggestion or that of the agent . Gillespie 's current attorney , Robert Perry , was not available to discuss the case . At the time Anderson and her companion were arrested , the FBI said , Wiebe was carrying `` a large bag to accommodate the monies . '' Like Anderson , he was reportedly a Canadian citizen . He was charged with conspiracy . Both were taken before a U.S. magistrate in Seattle and held pending further hearings .