Hollywood came to the rescue of a small , struggling radio station that went into debt trying to cover the Exxon Valdez oil spill and emerged from a celebrity auction Sunday in the black . Ironically , two items touting Exxon safety raised more money in a Saturday night auction benefiting radio station KCHU than Jane Fonda 's leotards or Robert Redford 's autographed picture or other items donated by film and television stars . But nothing beat the $ 5,000 pledged by Barbra Streisand during an earlier , weeklong pledge drive to help the 1,000-watt public station stay on the air and continue to cover the worst oil spill in U.S. history . Staff Covered Spill A few weeks after the March 24 grounding of the Exxon Valdez , the station serving the Prince William Sound communities had spent money budgeted to last until June 30 , the end of its fiscal year , by extensively covering spill events . Temporary news director Claire Richardson not only covered the story for KCHU but also provided reports to stations around the country , and station manager Dave Hammock anchored live statewide broadcasts of spill-related news conferences . Operations manager Mary Beth Joyce said the station was in danger of going off the air , despite an emergency grant from the city of Valdez to pay salaries , staff help from the Alaska Public Radio Network and pledges of support from listeners . Exxon offered $ 32,000 to the network , with one-third going to the Valdez station , but public radio officials rejected the donation to avoid a conflict of interest . Autographed items from celebrities that were auctioned off included a book from Jeff Bridges that earned $ 155 ; a sweat shirt from `` Cheers '' star Ted Danson that brought $ 100 ; Redford 's picture , which went for $ 50 ; Fonda 's tights , which fetched $ 100 , and a Patrick Swayze poster that was good for $ 45 . The `` L.A. Law '' cast sent pictures and a hat . Exxon Items Auctioned But two minor , once-innocuous Exxon items proved valuable collector 's items when auctioned . A 1987 Exxon safety award belt buckle earned $ 250 . And a prized 1989 mint-condition Exxon calendar , donated anonymously and featuring the wrecked tanker , drew a winning bid of $ 200 . Each month featured an Exxon ship , and March proudly featured the Exxon Valdez under the heading , `` Take Time to Be Careful Now . '' Joyce said the station needed to raise $ 25,000 to make it to the July 1 start of the next fiscal year . When all the money was added up Sunday , the station had raised $ 40,000 -- $ 27,000 from the weeklong , on-air pledge drive , $ 8,000 from the auction and $ 5,000 from Streisand .