In the glare of a hot sun and the blare of tinny bullhorns , about 3,000 anti-klan protesters gathered along Constitution Avenue near the Washington monument Sunday afternoon , waiting for the first sight of hoods and robes . They did n't appear . Opting to avoid a confrontation , the 46 knights of the Ku Klux Klan pocketed their permit to march along the avenue to the Capitol , instead staying on a bus and proceeding directly to the Capitol under police escort . There they held a brief rally for the benefit of a clutch of reporters and quickly ducked out of town . Although four police officers were injured during a bottle-and-brick throwing melee , officers prepared for the worst seemed relieved . The last time the klan came to the nation 's capital , in 1982 , the city erupted in violence that left windows broken and store shelves ransacked in downtown Washington . `` There is double the level of frustration in this city now compared to 1982 , '' said Brian Becker , a counterdemonstration leader . A few minutes before the march was to start he warned : `` We do n't want a confrontation , but the klan is such a provocation that we do n't know how people will react when they see hoods and robes . '' The National Park Police , the Capitol Police and the D.C. Metropolitan Police practiced riot scenarios weeks in advance . The National Guard was called in to direct traffic . Early Sunday , an armored personnel carrier was even spotted tucked behind the National Museum of American History . Black and white city leaders spent days reminding the city that the white supremacist group has a constitutional right to demonstrate . `` If the klan had showed , there would definitely have been violence , '' said Edward Cohen , a 23-year-old Washington native who turned out to demonstrate against the klan . `` I guess I 'm pretty happy with the way it turned out , '' he added , `` although I promised to bring my wife back a hood . '' After hearing that the march was cancelled , counterdemonstrators took off toward the Capitol en masse . `` I 'm going to find them , just like a heat-seeking missile . They ca n't get away , '' shouted one demonstrator as he marched along the wide , museum-sided avenue . But as the crowd neared Capitol Hill , tight lines of police , some carrying sticks , others in riot gear , blocked their path . A tense standoff ensued . After a loud exchange of words , the crowd began hurling paper , soft-drink bottles and pieces of bricks and concrete at the blue line of officers . In response , police set off M-80 explosives to frighten the crowd . When the confrontation ended about an hour later , four police officers , including a police department spokesman , were injured . Six counterdemonstrators were arrested , one for inciting a riot . There were no immediate reports of civilian injuries . But most participants agreed that , under the circumstances , all went well . `` I think that after what happened with Marion Barry , all the homeless in this city , all the unemployed and the drug problem , '' said Cohen , `` all the anger would have been turned on ( the klan ) . '' Not everyone was pleased , however . Don and Donna Decker were on their way to visit the Vietnam Memorial on Sunday morning but were diverted by the crowd . The retired couple from Eaton , Ohio , were carrying a new video camera . `` I 've never seen a person in a sheet and I wanted to take a picture of one with my new camera , '' Donna Decker said sadly . `` But I did n't get the chance . ''