El Camino , still looking for its first San Diego Section playoff berth after 14 years of trying , and Carlsbad , the defending 2-A section champions , had reversed roles all season . Entering Wednesday 's game at El Camino , the host team was only a half-game behind first-place Oceanside in the Avocado League , tied for second with San Pasqual . Carlsbad had lost its first five league games and sat alone in last . But this was a case in which the more things had changed , the more they had stayed the same . The Wildcats kicked the ball around , ran themselves out of big inning after big inning and handed Carlsbad its first league victory , 7-4 . El Camino ( 9-8 , 3-2 ) made four physical errors in addition to another several mental ones , allowing Carlsbad ( 9-12 , 1-5 ) to score three unearned runs . Five Wildcat runners were thrown out . One was picked off , another was thrown out trying to take an extra base after a single , and three more were shot down by Paul Harrold , Carlsbad 's sophomore catcher , on botched hit-and-run plays . El Camino Coach Adrian Leon said his aggressive running game , which was used even with his team four runs down in the seventh , had been working most of the year . `` The batters just were n't making contact , '' Leon said . `` It 's not our style to sit back and lie down . '' Even with all its troubles , El Camino trailed by just 3-2 going into the sixth . But Brian Black 's seventh homer of the year , off El Camino center fielder Kevin Knudson 's glove , and Jeff Jarrard 's RBI double gave Carlsbad a 5-2 lead . Bobby Womble 's run-scoring single closed it to 5-3 , but Carlsbad scored twice in the seventh without the aid of a hit . Martin Arispe , who replaced El Camino starter J.T . Patton ( 3-4 ) , walked the first two batters he faced . Then , Shad Cotton , who relieved Arispe , made a wild throw to first on a bunt , allowing both runners to score . The second run scored when El Camino infielders misplayed a rundown situation . El Camino now gets a shot at the league leaders , playing Oceanside ( 4-2 after a 9-1 loss to San Marcos ) Friday and San Pasqual ( 4-1 ) Saturday in a makeup game . DAVE McKIBBEN