A federal advisory panel recommended Friday that the Food and Drug Administration reject a proposal to undertake a ground-breaking U.S.-Soviet study of 20,000 women to determine whether a hormonal drug can prevent breast cancer . The FDA 's Oncology Drugs Advisory Committee agreed that a long-term study should be conducted to determine the effect of the hormonal drug tamoxifen in preventing breast cancer and other cancers in healthy women . But the panel said that its members had concluded that the design of the proposed 10-year , $ 100-million study of women in the United States and the Soviet Union was flawed . The committee said that it would recommend ways to correct the deficiencies . `` I 'm disappointed for the women of the country , '' said Phillip D. Bretz , director of the Desert Breast Institute in Rancho Mirage and one of the proposed study leaders . `` I felt it was time to do it . None of these answers are going to be resolved until this study is done . '' Although the recommendation of an FDA advisory committee is not binding , it typically wields considerable weight in agency decision-making . The FDA must approve the U.S. segment of the study before it can begin . The committee said there was insufficient information on how the study would be conducted , including recruitment of patients and handling of data . Some members also expressed concern that the volunteers would not be at high enough risk for breast cancer . Bretz , however , said that the study was rejected because he did not have the academic ties of traditional researchers . He said that he would revise his study proposal in an effort to satisfy the committee 's demands . The proposed study , endorsed by American and Soviet cancer specialists in March , would involve administration of tamoxifen , an anti-estrogen drug already widely used in post-surgical breast cancer therapy , to women considered at high risk for breast cancer . It would be the first large-scale study undertaken jointly in the United States and Soviet Union , its sponsors said . The pool of participants , about 10,000 from each country , would consist primarily of daughters , sisters or mothers of women who have had breast cancer and who are considered at high risk of developing the disease themselves . Half of the women would be given a medically worthless placebo for comparison purposes . The researchers had predicted a 25 % reduction in the incidence of breast cancer among the women who were given the drug . The study would be coordinated by Bretz ; Dr. Philip B. Dreisbach , of the Eisenhower Medical Center in Rancho Mirage , and Dr. David Zaridze , deputy director of the All-Union Cancer Research Institute in Moscow . The study was opposed by some women 's health advocacy groups , who said it is dangerous to experiment with drugs on healthy women . `` This is a drug that is not risk-free , '' said Cindy Pearson , program director of the National Women 's Health Network . `` It 's a fine drug for a breast cancer patient -- a woman facing the possibility of death is more than willing to take a drug that has some risk . But to jump from a drug that 's effective in a group with a life-threatening disease to a huge trial in healthy women is crazy . '' But Dr. Wendy Schain , a psychologist with Memorial Cancer Institute in Long Beach and a former breast cancer patient , recommended approval of the study . `` This is the best we 've got , '' she said . `` We need to get these answers . We have no better way to get them . '' Tamoxifen causes cancer in animals and has been linked to stroke , heart disease and endometrial cancer in women , according to the FDA . Sponsors of the proposed study , however , maintain that tamoxifen has minimal negative side effects and often reduces cholesterol and eases cardiovascular problems . FDA officials said that a large study of a drug in healthy humans was `` a little unusual , '' but not unprecedented . `` Any time you do a study on a drug for prophylaxis ( prevention ) , you 're going to use healthy people , '' said Dr. Robert Temple , the FDA 's director of new drug evaluation . Tamoxifen , manufactured by the British firm Imperial Chemical Industries and sold under the brand name Nolvadex , has been used for more than a decade to prevent the recurrence of tumors in women whose cancer had spread to the underarm lymph nodes . Recently , the FDA approved its use in the post-surgical treatment of early breast cancer in women who do not have node involvement . In this country , it is produced and marketed by ICI Pharmaceuticals of Wilmington , Del . Tamoxifen works by blocking so-called estrogen receptors -- areas on the surface of cells to which the hormone binds to exert its effects . In that way , it blocks the effects of estrogen , which is believed to play a role in the stimulation of tumor growth in breast cancer . Breast cancer is the most common malignancy among women in the United States and the second leading cause of cancer death among women , after lung cancer . An estimated 150,000 new cases will be diagnosed this year .