Computer leasing is not a business for the faint-hearted . A decade ago , Itel Corp. , OPM Leasing Services and other big lessors went broke . These days the industry , fiercely competitive as always , is going through another shakeout . But in that turbulence a Northridge company , El Camino Resources Ltd. , sees opportunity . El Camino buys , sells and leases computers to businesses , and the company believes it can shed its small-time status and become a major player in part by exploiting the problems besetting some of its leasing rivals . `` We 're beefing up the leasing side because there 's been a big fallout in leasing companies right now , '' said David E. Harmon , El Camino 's president and co-founder . `` To be honest with you , the company has always fed off of other people 's problems . '' Indeed , privately held El Camino was founded in 1979 just as Itel and the other lessors ran out of cash and collapsed . `` We were Itel 's largest customer when they were going down , '' Harmon said . `` We were buying products from them like crazy . '' El Camino has grown briskly since then , as has the computer leasing and trading industry generally , despite some of its members ' problems . ( Computer trading refers to the buying and selling of equipment between computer brokers and dealers such as El Camino , as opposed to the manufacturers ' sales directly to the machines ' end users . ) In its fiscal year that ended April 30 , El Camino 's revenue totaled $ 254 million , up from $ 55 million four years earlier , and the company now has 172 employees spread over nine offices . Total U.S. trading and leasing of computer equipment climbed to $ 23 billion last year from $ 16 billion in 1987 , according to the Computer Dealers & Lessors Assn. , a Washington-based trade group . But El Camino 's size is still dwarfed by Comdisco Inc. , the nation 's biggest independent computer lessor , which had $ 1.7 billion in fiscal 1989 revenue , and by International Business Machines Corp. , which in addition to being the world 's biggest computer maker is also a huge lessor with roughly $ 2 billion in annual worldwide leasing revenue . Nonetheless , El Camino expects to triple its annual leasing business -- which produced $ 82 million of revenue in the latest fiscal year -- because it has two new Japanese partners with deep pockets , Japan Leasing Corp. and Applied Technology Corp. Last month , they agreed to invest an undisclosed amount of cash in El Camino in exchange for a combined 25 % stake in the company . ( Harmon maintains a 27 % interest , and four other El Camino executives own the remaining stock . ) `` They saw it as an opportunity to build a substantial leasing operation here in the U.S. working with us , '' Harmon said . But with El Camino 's growth has come at least one problem : The company is making less of a profit per dollar of revenue than it was four years ago . In fiscal 1986 , El Camino earned $ 2.4 million , giving it an after-tax profit margin of 4.4 % . In fiscal 1990 , the company 's revenue was nearly five times higher , but its profit of $ 4.3 million was less than twice as big , so its profit margin last year was only 1.7 % . By contrast , Comdisco , a Rosemont , Ill. , concern , had a fiscal 1989 profit margin of 6.4 % . The problem ? Brian Ofria , El Camino 's chief financial officer , said margins are slim on many of the big computers that El Camino buys and sells , mainly because many competitors offer the same equipment . Like most of the leasing business , El Camino specializes in trading IBM 's products , and IBM 's own sales and leasing efforts also have been a big factor in keeping a lid on the industry 's profit margins . IBM lately has been `` as aggressive as we 've ever seen , '' said Ken Bouldin , president of the Computer Dealers & Lessors . `` IBM itself is offering steep discounts on its equipment that people purchase . '' He said IBM Credit Corp. , its financing and leasing unit , also `` is offering aggressively low rates for lease deals . As a result , it 's difficult for some of the industry 's companies to slug it out with IBM . '' Ofria said El Camino also takes a conservative accounting approach to valuing its leasing business , which hurts its profits . Specifically , it conservatively guesses how much the computers will be worth for resale after leasing customers return the machines , and it depreciates the computers ' value more rapidly on its books . Depreciation is subtracted from a company 's net income . Correctly guessing a computer 's future selling price , or `` residual value , '' is n't easy . The original value of a computer can plunge only a year or two after its introduction if its technology is made obsolete by a newer machine . If so , a lessor such as El Camino could be saddled with an antiquated computer that fetches far less than originally predicted when re-leased or sold . In any case , Harmon said that with El Camino increasing its leasing business , the company 's profit margin will get worse before it gets better . But El Camino 's other co-founder , David Wolff , an executive vice president , said the increased leasing activity `` means more equipment to go ahead and sell and remarket when it comes off lease , '' which should bolster El Camino 's performance in a few years . Harmon is key to El Camino 's performance , at least to some of its customers . He 's `` very loyal to you , which means that regardless of what the contract says , Dave will demonstrate flexibility , '' said William Strowbridge , who runs the computer department at Dataproducts Corp. , a Woodland Hills maker of computer printers that leases large-scale computers . A graduate of Michigan State University , Harmon , 51 , first worked for IBM for four years and then , in the 1970s , he was a vice president at Electronic Memories & Magnetics , a maker of computer memory products . Wolff worked for Harmon at EM & M before the two left in 1979 to form El Camino . `` Was there a grandiose plan at that point ? No , I do n't think so , '' Harmon said . Because it 's privately held , El Camino has no quoted stock price to establish its market value . But a rough measure can come from comparing it with publicly held Comdisco , whose market value as of Friday was $ 775 million , or 46 % of its annual sales . Using that gauge , El Camino would be worth $ 116 million , and Harmon 's stake alone $ 31 million . ( It should be noted that Comdisco 's price has fallen recently , however . Its market value in March was $ 1 billion . ) For now , Harmon claims he has no interest in cashing out by selling El Camino , even though he 's already received at least one takeover bid . And to hear Harmon tell it , few would-be buyers would be interested anyway , because they would have to buy El Camino without Harmon at the helm . `` I probably would n't stay , frankly , '' meaning a buyer 's `` prospects for making the maximum return are not as good , '' he said . `` And this is a people business . '' EL CAMINO RESOURCES AT A GLANCE El Camino Resources Ltd. in Northridge sells and leases computers and related equipment , primarily to businesses . Founded in 1979 , the company also provides emergency computer-back-up services . El Camino has 172 employees and is privately held .