Actress Sharon Gless , co-star of the `` Cagney and Lacey '' TV series , testified Wednesday that she lied when she told reporters that she did not live at the Studio City house that an obsessed fan allegedly invaded with a rifle . She was worried that disclosure of her address would lead to copycat incidents by other fans , Gless testified at a preliminary hearing in San Fernando Municipal Court for Joni Leigh Penn , 30 , of Garden Grove . `` The reason was to protect me , since it 's been blasted all over the press what my exact address was , '' Gless said . `` I was very upset when I saw my actual address on the curb being photographed by the press . '' Gless , through her publicist Heidi Schaeffer , told reporters at the time of the incident that the house was used primarily as an office and that the actress resided elsewhere . In fact , Gless said Wednesday , she sleeps at the house about five nights a week and spends the other nights at her second house , which detectives said is in Malibu . The issue of whether Gless lived at the house is important because Penn can not be found guilty of residential burglary if the dwelling was used as an office , said Penn 's attorney , Deputy Public Defender Mitchell J. Bruckner . Penn was charged with two counts of residential burglary after police said she barricaded herself in the actress ' house on March 30 with a .22-caliber rifle and 500 rounds of ammunition . Police persuaded Penn to surrender after a seven-hour standoff . Penn threatened to commit suicide and intended to commit an act of sexual battery on Gless , said detectives , who would not elaborate . One of the counts stems from an alleged burglary three days earlier at the house , in which Penn allegedly stole Gless ' address book to obtain the location of the actress ' Malibu house . Penn , described by police as an obsessive fan of Gless ' , sent the actress at least 140 letters over a three-year period , authorities said . Gless obtained a restraining order in 1988 forbidding Penn to harass the actress or her family . Gless testified that she did not feel seriously threatened by Penn despite the fact that the stream of letters continued after the restraining order was issued . `` I did n't honestly feel anything like this would happen , never in a million years , '' Gless said . `` I do n't think that way . Other people were much more concerned than I . ''