Neil Sheehan , the journalist who uncovered the Pentagon Papers in 1971 , was awarded a Pulitzer Prize Thursday for his powerful history of the Vietnam War -- a book that took him 16 difficult years to complete . For Sheehan , the nonfiction prize for his book , `` A Bright Shining Lie : John Paul Vann and America in Vietnam , '' was particularly sweet . It came on his 24th wedding anniversary . And his wife , Susan , had won a Pulitzer in the same category in 1983 for her book on the crippling effects of mental illness . In the journalism category , the Pulitzer Prize for distinguished public service was given to the Anchorage Daily News for its coverage of the high incidence of alcoholism and suicide among native Alaskans -- a series that focused attention on their despair and brought about reforms . The prize for specialized reporting was given to Edward Humes of the Orange County Register for his in-depth reporting on the military establishment in Southern California . The Philadelphia Inquirer and the Chicago Tribune each won two Pulitzers . Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele of the Inquirer received the national reporting award for their 15-month investigation of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 . The judges said the Inquirer 's series aroused such widespread indignation that Congress rejected proposals giving special tax breaks to many politically connected individuals and businesses . Barlett and Steele won in the same category in 1975 for reporting on the Internal Revenue Service . David Zucchino of the Inquirer won the feature writing prize for a `` richly compelling series '' about being a black in South Africa . Clarence Page of the Tribune won in the commentary category for his columns on local and national affairs , while Lois Wille of the same newspaper won for editorial writing . Jack Higgins of the Chicago Sun-Times was given the prize for his editorial cartoons . Prize for Drama Among other arts awards , the prize for drama was given to playwright Wendy Wasserstein for her play about baby boomers , `` The Heidi Chronicles , '' which appeared off-Broadway and will open on Broadway later this month . Novelist Anne Tyler won the fiction award for `` Breathing Lessons , '' the sad , funny story of a couple married 28 years who are traveling to the funeral of an old friend . The prize for music went to UC San Diego composer Roger Reynolds for his work , `` Whispers Out of Time '' for string orchestra . Reynolds was putting the final touches on a new composition for solo cello when he learned of the award . `` The work 's title was taken from a line of poetry by John Ashbery , a New York poet who also won a Pulitzer Prize ( 1976 ) , '' said Reynolds , reached at his Del Mar residence . `` Like the poem , the composition contemplates the artist and his time . '' Reynolds ' Pulitzer Prize for music marks the second such award given a UCSD music faculty member . In 1984 , Bernard Rands won the prize for `` Canti del Soli . '' `` These two awards place UCSD in the forefront of contemporary music -- a real feather in our cap , '' said John Lauer , administrative director for UCSD 's Center for Music Experiment . Reynolds founded the unique center for theoretical music research in 1972 . In Washington , the Sheehans were opening their anniversary cards when a reporter phoned to announce that Neil Sheehan had won the Pulitzer . `` It feels absolutely marvelous , '' he said. `` . . . If you have been a reporter , it has a special meaning to you because it is a kind of judgment of your peers . I still consider myself a journalist . '' Sheehan , who as a reporter for the New York Times had incurred the wrath of the Richard M. Nixon Administration for uncovering the Pentagon Papers -- a secret Defense Department history of Vietnam -- chose as the central figure of his prize-winning book Lt. Col. John Paul Vann , who died in Vietnam in 1972 and was a critic of the manner in which the Pentagon conducted the early stages of the war . Sees Symbol of War When Sheehan attended Vann 's funeral and looked at the other mourners -- people from government , the military and civilian life -- he realized that Vann had been the symbol of America 's involvement in the war . In the years that followed , Sheehan suffered a crippling auto accident and , according to friends , agonized over his topic . Sheehan said Thursday that the opinion of other critics -- Vietnam veterans -- also was enormously rewarding . `` I get letters . I get phone calls . I get telegrams , '' he said. `` 'You told it like it was . You put me back there . But now for the first time I know what it was all about . ' The veterans are your real reviewers . They are your reviewers of last resort . '' The 73rd annual Pulitzer Prizes in journalism , letters , drama and music were announced by Columbia University . The Courier-Journal of Louisville , Ky. , won the general news reporting prize for its coverage of a bus crash that claimed 27 lives and its subsequent thorough examination of the causes and implications of the tragedy . Bill Dedman of the Atlanta Journal and Constitution won the investigative reporting prize for his scrutiny of racial discrimination practices by lending institutions in Atlanta . Reporter David Hanners , photographer William Snyder and artist Karen Blessen of the Dallas Morning News won the explanatory journalism prize for their special report on a 1986 plane crash . The team 's follow-up investigation showed wide ramifications for air safety . The Washington Post and the New York Times shared the prize for international reporting . Glenn Frankel of the Post was cited for his `` sensitive and balanced reports '' from Israel and the Middle East . Bill Keller of the New York Times was honored for what the judges labeled `` resourceful and detailed coverage of events in the U.S.S.R. '' Raleigh Critic Wins The criticism prize was given to Michael Skube , book editor of the Raleigh ( N.C. ) News and Observer for his articles about books and other literary topics . In the photography categories , Ron Olshwanger , a free-lance photographer whose work appeared in the St. Louis Post-Dispatch , won the spot news prize . Olshwanger is the co-owner of a wholesale furniture showroom in St. Louis . His picture showed a firefighter giving mouth-to-mouth resuscitation to a child pulled from a burning building . Manny Crisostomo of the Detroit Free Press won the feature photography prize for his series of photographs depicting student life at a Detroit high school . Other prizes included an award to the late Richard Ellmann for his biography of Oscar Wilde and the poetry award to Richard Wilbur for his `` New and Collected Poems . '' The history prize was shared by Taylor Branch for `` Parting the Waters : America in the King Years , 1954-63 , '' Branch 's probing historical look at Dr. Martin Luther King Jr . The co-winner was James M. McPherson for his book , `` Battle Cry of Freedom : The Civil War Era . '' All the prizes carry an award of $ 3,000 except in the public service category , where a gold medal is given .