Is is possible to create a big , glossy sex fantasy that is so silly , it gives sex a bad name ? `` Wild Orchid '' ( citywide ) , asks us to believe that star and debuting actress Carre Otis -- the model from the Guess jeans ads -- is a specialist in international law , hired on sight and whisked off to Rio de Janiero for a complex business deal that seems to involve sex with most of the principals . It asks us to believe that Mickey Rourke -- sporting a wardrobe that consists mostly of black sports coat over bare chest , one gold earring and numerous layers of dark pancake makeup -- is an international entrepreneur trying to overcome a deprived youth as the stuttering child of Pittsburgh proles . It asks us to believe that Jacqueline Bisset , as Claudia , takes business calls while dancing the frug and has tremendous difficulties getting Rourke into bed . It asks us to believe . . . . Well , why go on ? This movie makes sexual adventurism seems so ludicrous , that it might have been made by Puritans in disguise , trying to portray hedonists as a pack of fatheads . Director-writer Zalman King , who along with collaborator-wife Patricia Louisiana Knop , also wrote `` 8 1/2 Weeks '' for Adrian Lyne , is obviously trying for something lusciously steamy and seamy . But he does n't have swank-master Lyne 's high-gloss , back-lit , dry-ice skills . The movie is like a piece of hard-core pornography in which most of the sex scenes have been removed , softened or turned into perfume commercials -- and in which only the dopey connecting expository scenes are left . King tries not to miss a trick . To show that his characters are involved in artifice and deceit , he has them put on fancy masks . To show that they should be having a good time but are n't , he sets the movie during carnival time . To show that he 's a feminist at heart , he has Bisset and Otis dress up as men . To show that he has n't forgotten audiences , he has the blouse or top ripped off nearly every actress in the film , except Bisset , who does her bit in a dry T-shirt . To show he reads the newspaper he throws in the lambada , and to show he watches art films he casts Assumpta Serna , from `` Matador . '' She plays the role of her career : a frigid wife who gets cured after a drunken sailor tears her top off . If `` Wild Orchid '' ( MPAA rated R for sex and language ) were a little bit sillier , it might classify as a minor classic of howling camp . As it is , the movie is pseudo-swanky , chic and sappy .