President Bush and his two Republican predecessors will join Richard M. Nixon next month for the opening of his long-awaited presidential library in Yorba Linda as the political thaw surrounding the Watergate President continues , officials said Monday . Jimmy Carter , the only Democrat elected President since Nixon resigned in 1974 , sent his regrets . A spokeswoman said Carter wanted to attend the July 19 event but has a previous commitment . The occasion will be the first meeting of the four living Republican presidents since Bush was elected . Nixon 's ailing wife , Pat , also is expected to make her first public appearance since leaving the White House in 1974 . `` We already have a tremendously exciting event , '' said Hugh Hewitt , director of the Nixon library foundation . `` Everything else is just gravy . '' The library dedication , which will be open to the public , is scheduled for 9 a.m. on the site where Nixon was born in 1913 near a citrus grove in a tiny white clapboard house . About 1,500 people also are invited to a private , black-tie dinner at the Century Plaza . It was unclear whether Bush or former Presidents Ronald Reagan and Gerald Ford planned to attend both events . Hewitt said the White House had not yet officially confirmed that Bush would attend the dedication , but an Administration official told The Times that Bush was going . Nixon has enjoyed a return to the public spotlight because of a new book he has written on Watergate , a planned public television appearance and a visit to Washington where he was heralded as an elder statesman . The presence of Bush , Reagan and Ford also represents an easing in the attitude of elected officials toward the former President . The privately funded $ 21-million library is scheduled to open July 20 -- almost 17 years after Nixon left office . In contrast , the Carter and Ford libraries are already operating ; Reagan 's is under construction and scheduled to open next February in Simi Valley . Nixon 's 84,000-square-foot library will contain no original papers from his years in the White House . Instead , it will house copies of documents from his presidential term , as well as materials from his terms in Congress and as vice president , plus book manuscripts , private papers and White House diaries . Times staff writer James Gertzenzang contributed to this story