Former national Ku Klux Klan leader David Duke , running against a local businessman who received endorsements from President Bush and former President Ronald Reagan , captured a hotly contested seat in the Louisiana Legislature by 224 votes Saturday . Duke , 38 , publisher of a newspaper for the National Assn . for the Advancement of White People and a proponent of relocating minorities to segregated sections of the country , ran as a newly registered Republican . He received 8,456 votes , or 51 % , in this almost all-white New Orleans suburb to defeat John Treen , 63 , who got 8,232 votes . Nearly 78 % of the registered voters in the 81st House District turned out on a chilly , wet day for the runoff election , which was a larger vote here than in the presidential election last November , officials said . `` This election is the greatest political upset in Louisiana history , maybe in American history , '' Duke said . `` The people of Metairie have spoken . `` I do n't think there 's been a candidate in recent history who has been more attacked , slandered , lied about and hurt in the way I was hurt , and our good people were hurt , in this campaign , '' he said in a victory speech . Brother of Ex-Governor Treen , a Metairie home builder and brother of the state 's former governor , David Treen , called Duke `` a disaster for our area . '' `` I know what this man really is , '' he said . `` The public . . . does n't or they would n't have voted the way they did . He 's a master of deception . He conned them into believing he is something he is not . '' The usually run-of-the-mill election drew worldwide coverage after the controversial Duke surprised political observers by changing his party affiliation last December and entering a seven-man primary , capturing 33 % of the vote to Treen 's 19 % . Since neither candidate received more than half the vote , both Republicans were forced into the runoff election . Duke , who said he left the klan in 1980 but still lists his home phone number as the New Orleans klan office , delivered a blow to local , state and national Republican leaders with the victory Saturday . They quickly disavowed his election . 'Not a Republican ' '' David Duke is not a Republican , '' Republican National Chairman Lee Atwater said in a statement released by the party Saturday night . `` He 's a pretender , a charlatan and a political opportunist who is looking for any organization he can find to try to legitimize his views of racial and religious bigotry and intolerance . `` We repudiate him in his views , and we will take steps to see that he is disenfranchised from our party if he is declared the official winner , '' Atwater said . Party officials in Washington said that if Duke is certified the winner , Atwater will hold an executive meeting of the Republican National Committee to consider a motion of censure that was called `` the political equivalent of excommunication . '' The motion would condemn Duke and deny him any form of party aid or assistance . Many other political and civic leaders also opposed Duke . `` He espouses the same philosophies of many Republicans , being against affirmative action and set-asides , '' state Rep. Quentin Dastugue said . `` The problem is that he backs it up with racism and bigotry . '' Efforts by Bush , Reagan In the last week of the campaign , Bush , Reagan , Atwater and nearly every Republican politician in the state threw their support behind Treen . Letters from Bush promoting Treen 's candidacy arrived at most homes in the district by Election Day and a radio advertisement by Reagan urged voters to support Treen . Treen 's campaign sought to remind the voters of Duke 's past as a neo-Nazi follower of George Lincoln Rockwell and as the imperial wizard of a branch of the klan . In New Orleans , the Roman Catholic archbishop urged voters not to vote for Duke , while the president of Loyola University dispatched 785 letters to alumni in the district suggesting that they not vote for Duke . But Duke supporters said that Reagan and Bush , who received more than 80 % of the vote here in their presidential campaigns , were out of their element in this campaign . `` Reagan 's never eaten at the Popeye 's chicken where I grew up , '' said Joseph Breau , 31 , an electronics engineer . `` He never went to the Time Saver ( store ) where I go . '' 'Slime and Sham ' '' The people saw through the slime and the sham being spewed forth by our competition , '' said Howie Farrell , Duke 's campaign manager . `` What does ( Reagan ) know about this place and the people of Metairie . The only thing he knows is that when he goes from the airport to New Orleans , this is where they hold up the traffic for two hours so he can get through . '' Saturday 's election was Duke 's latest foray into politics . In 1975 he ran for a state Senate seat , making no attempt to hide his klan affiliation , and won a third of the vote in an affluent Baton Rouge district . In 1979 , he ran for the 10th District Senate seat in Metairie and won about a fourth of the vote . In 1988 , he ran for the presidency as a member of the Populist Party . In the general election , he ran in 15 states and drew less than .05 % of the national total vote . He began his presidential bid as a Democrat but was repudiated by party officials . He got no delegates at the Democratic National Convention .