The bill creating Yosemite National Park was signed into law Oct. 1 , 1890 . By 1906 , President Theodore Roosevelt had visited the park , hiked to Bridalveil Falls with John Muir and added Yosemite Valley and the Mariposa Sequoia Grove to the park 's acreage . On a typical mid-summer weekend , there are 3,320 tourists per square mile in Yosemite Valley . Ansel Adams worked as Yosemite 's publicist / photographer when he moved there in 1927 ; in the next thirty years he shot more than 40,000 park images . The Ahwahnichi ( meaning `` people who live in the valley shaped like a big mouth '' ) Indians inhabited Yosemite Valley as early as the1500s . In 1625 , there were 2,000 Ahwahnichi Indians ; the last Ahwahnichi family left Yosemite in 1969 . Capt . Kirk and Mr. Spock made a famous on-camera `` ascent '' of El Capitan in `` Star Trek V. '' Stunt climbers were used for the rock-face scenes , and the two actors , William Shatner and Leonard Nimoy , were helicoptered to the summit for the finale . The first ascent of the back of Half Dome , using ropes and eyebolts , was in 1875 . In 1919 , Sierra Club members replaced those with the rock 's first cable ladder-cum-walkway . Naturalist Johnn Muir was 30 when he first came to Yosemite Valley via Inspiration Point in 1868 ; he had sailed from the Gulf of Mexico to San Francisco and from there hiked 200 miles into the valley . He once rode half a mile on a Sierra snow avalanche , living to write : `` Elija 's flight in a chariot of fire could hardly have been more exciting . '' Exhaust , traffic jams and high tempers led to the 1972 start of the valley shuttle-bus service to stores , restaurants and museums . Today , the average wait for a shuttle is eight minutes . Seventy-seven species of mammals live in Yosemite National Park . The most common is the deer mouse ; the rarest is the wolverine . In 1892 , Yosemite banned grizzly bear hunting , and that same year the Department of Fish and Game introduced rainbow trout to the park 's streams and lakes . Each evening at sundown , park rangers used to fill a large chicken-wire ball with redwood bark and set it afire , and hurl it off Glacier Point to create the famous Yosemite fire fall . The spectacular sight was canceled in 1968 when spectator traffic jams filled the valley floor . It had been a park tradition since 1872 . During Yosemite 's third decade , rangers coaxed bears into the valley to eat garbage and frolic for spectators . The popular tourist attraction was discontinued in 1941 , after the bears began to stay past showtime . The bears , however , had learned that where there were humans , there was food . By 1975 , the number of reported human-bear incidents rose to 860 ; that year , rangers shot and killed six Yosemite bears . Not long after , the Human-Bear Management Plan , which educated people and marked troublesome bears for relocation in the high country , was developed . Yosemite rangers started carrying guns in 1967 -- `` It was during the hippie era and you never knew what you would encounter , '' remembers one -- and still carry them today . The 1970 Steadman Meadow affair also marked the hippie era . Rangers were accused of brutality when they used riot sticks to disperse hundreds of young people gathered for the July 4th weekend ; 174 were arrested . Yosemite Valley was the first runner-up as the site of the 1932 Winter Olympics . The Games were held in Lake Placid . Each year , about 1,200 climbing parties attempt to scale El Capitan , 3,593 feet above the valley floor . Fewer than half make it to the top . There are 200 routes up the famous rock 's face ; the fastest party to reach the summit did it in six hours this year . The first car drove into the park in 1900 , but most early visitors rode the Central Pacific Railroad from Stockton to within miles of the park entrance . The rest of the journey into the valley was completed in horse-drawn stagecoaches . In 1913 , when car access began in ernest , the speed limit on curves was 6 miles per hour . Parachuting off El Capitan was briefly permitted in 1970 , but was eventually considered too dangerous and outlawed in 1980 . In 1973 , stunt skier Rick Sylvester became the first -- and only -- person to ski-parachute off El Capitan . When he landed he was arrested and charged with illegal flight . On a peak visitor day , the general store in Yosemite Village will sell 450 rolls of camera film . John Muir considered the Hetch-Hetchy Valley , on the park 's northern boundary , even more beautiful than Yosemite Valley , and when the Hetch-Hetchy Dam was approved in 1914 , he left the park heartbroken . He died of pneumonia the following year and never saw the flooded valley . The dam was completed in 1934 , sending water to San Francisco taps . Every year , Yosemite hosts the Bracebridge Dinner , a traditional English Christmas supper served by costumed actors in the Great Lounge of the Ahwahnee . The first dinner was held the year the Ahwahnee opened , and the lead role of Squire Bracebridge was played by photographer Ansel Adams . When the Ahwahnee Hotel opened in 1927 , a room cost $ 6 a night and included maid service and a chauffeur . Today , rooms go for nearly $ 200 a night , and it 's almost impossible to get reservations less than a year ahead of time . As part of a tourist package , the Curry Co. in 1924 created Indian Field Days , a `` festival and rodeo to celebrate the colorful culture of the park 's original inhabitants . '' The Ahwahnichi , fewer than 15 families who lived at government-owned Camp Sunnyside in the park , demonstrated basketry and weaving , competed in a `` cutest Indian baby '' contest and performed native dances for a mostly Anglo audience . Indian Field Days ended in 1929 amid criticism calling the event exploitative . A raging fire ignited by lightning charred close to 13,000 park acres this past August . Aggressive firefighting , which snuffed the blaze in two weeks , caused some grumblings in the Park Service , which contends that natural fires should be allowed to burn unchecked in parts of the park . Galen Clark , appointed Yosemite 's first superintendent in 1866 , was paid $ 500 a year and lived rent-free on parkland ; Michael Finley , the current superintendent , is paid $ 69,086 and rents National Park Service housing for $ 487.54 a month .