The Major League lockout nearly threw the baseball card business a curve , but Upper Deck , the hottest commodity in that booming market , was already safe at home . Baseball card sales are typically slowest just before spring training opens . But with the delay caused by the teams ' lockout of players , some expected the retail card market to suffer a prolonged sag . However , Upper Deck , the Yorba Linda-based manufacturer of slick -- and quite expensive -- trading cards , had already sold out its 1990 production before the 32 days of negotiations between Major League teams and players ended . From its inception , Upper Deck has been able to overcome economic obstacles en route to success in a highly competitive field . When the firm burst on the market a year ago , it faced an uphill struggle competing with the entrenched card company giants Topps , Score , Fleer and Donruss . But Upper Deck introduced several innovations such as color action photos front and back , and it quickly captured the high-end market with its elaborately designed cards . A full set of Upper Deck cards -- if you can get one -- commands $ 55 , contrasted with the $ 22 to $ 25 prices for one from a rival company . The baseball lockout would eventually have hurt retail card sales had it continued , Upper Deck President Richard McWilliam said . But Upper Deck already had orders from dealers that assured a sell-out for its entire year 's production , company officials said . `` No other company sells out , '' said McWilliam , 36 , of Corona del Mar , who played the game in high school and college and has a background in accounting and real estate . McWilliam was approached in late 1987 by Paul Sumner , who had `` a little dream . . . to make Architectural Digest-quality baseball cards . '' Sumner , now 43 , of Chino was at the time vice president of sales at Orbis Graphic in Anaheim , and he has a background in printing and holography . With a third partner , Sumner 's boss , Boris Korbel , the men set out to produce a prototype card impressive enough to persuade Major League Baseball and the players ' association to grant the firm a license to produce cards bearing team logos and players ' photos . Joined by a fourth partner , Richard Kughn , of Detroit , Upper Deck has grown from a small office with six employees to a self-contained printing company employing 250 . Breaking into the big leagues was not easy for the company , however . Upper Deck cards were shipped to retailers for the first time in March , 1989 , three months after its competitors had their sets on the shelves . By introducing several new features -- color photos front and back , a hologram scheme to prevent counterfeiting and high-grade paper stock -- Upper Deck immediately drew rave reviews and an unprecedented demand . It virtually created a high-end market for baseball cards . Company officials say their cards are for children and adults , casual collectors and profit-minded investors alike . They are sold through a variety of retail outlets , not just baseball card shops . Despite the fact that they are intended to have a broad appeal , Upper Deck sees its cards as the Rolls-Royce of the industry . `` It really did take off right from the start , '' said Bob Lemke , publisher of Krause Publications ' Baseball Cards , a 310,000-circulation magazine that lists card prices in the resale market . `` They are just far and away superior in terms of value . '' A Topps 16-card pack retails for about 50 cents at most outlets . The suggested price for an Upper Deck 15-card pack is 99 cents , but the pack is routinely sold for $ 1.50 and more . At times last year , the packs were going for up to $ 3 , says George France , a Fullerton baseball card shop owner . McWilliam says Upper Deck 's innovations have inspired changes among its competitors . Upper Deck 's foil packages , for example , prevent unscrupulous dealers from peeking through wrappers to see whether higher-valued players ' cards are inside and keeping those for themselves . Kenneth Liss , a spokesman for Topps Co. Inc. of Philadelphia , the baseball card industry leader , said his company has since changed some of its wrappers to obscure the contents . `` I would n't say any one company has directly influenced us , '' he said . `` We 're always looking at new ways of doing things . '' Although Topps , which is in its 40th year of baseball card production , does not release precise production figures , it claims to have sold more than 1 billion cards last year . Lemke estimates that Topps ' production amounts to about 5 million copies of each Major League player 's card ; as recently as 1983 , the copies numbered 750,000 . Upper Deck says it purposely limited its initial 1989 production to just 1 million sets of each card , which drove up the demand . ( Subsequently , Upper Deck printed more cards that were sold in complete sets rather than in packs of 15 cards each . The company will not reveal how many sets . ) `` We 're not really looking to manufacture Upper Deck cards to meet demand , '' said Donald M. Bodow , vice president of marketing for the company . `` We do n't want our cards to be generally perceived as being as easily available as a glass of water . They are being perceived as true collectibles . '' When Upper Deck announced its intention to limit production , it was `` a first in the hobby where those types of numbers are jealously guarded , '' Lemke said . Upper Deck , which is privately owned , does not release its sales figures . Topps , which also produces candy and gum products as well as non-sports trading cards , posted a record $ 198 million in sales in the year ending Feb. 25 , 1989 , more than half of which was baseball cards . Liss said the company expects to surpass that this year . The baseball card market continues to grow each year , leaving plenty of room for newcomers such as Upper Deck , industry officials say . Estimates of card and memorabilia sales range from $ 400 million to $ 600 million a year , Lemke said . Although Upper Deck 's McWilliam declined to say how much in royalties his firm pays Major League Baseball or the players ' association , Krause Publications ' Lemke estimates the fees to be about 8 % of sales . When it comes to baseball cards , the older , more scarce issues of popular players often resell for enormous sums . The 1990 Upper Deck card of rookie Baltimore Oriole pitcher Ben McDonald is reselling for $ 100 because the `` rookie '' designation was inadvertently left off in printing . McWilliam curtly denies printing errors -- such as that on the McDonald card and one in 1989 in which Atlanta Braves slugger Dale Murphy was reversed , driving up the resale value of that card to $ 150 -- are intentional . He points out that the company does not profit from resales . Indeed , McWilliam said , Upper Deck uses a sophisticated random sorting system that makes the chances for getting a highly sought-after card equal in each pack . Alan Rosen of New Jersey , believed to be among the world 's largest baseball card dealers , usually has little interest in current cards , preferring to concentrate on the more valuable older items . This year , however , Rosen `` will be dabbling for the first time in newer cards , in the Upper Deck cards , '' said Greg Sholes , who works for Rosen 's Mr. Mint memorabilia business . `` He feels it 's a strong enough product . '' Sholes , who also buys and sells cards himself as an investment , was impressed by Upper Deck 's entrance in the baseball card market . `` I personally have seen nothing like it in the hobby , '' he said . `` The demand was unbelievable by dealers . I 'd say ( Upper Deck is ) a cut above . '' BASEBALL CARD SCOREBOARD Upper Deck has carved out a niche in the high end of the baseball card market . The company 's cards command a higher price because of several innovations , including color photos on both sides , high-grade paper and a hologram to prevent counterfeiting . Estimated price of complete 1989 baseball card sets June April Pct . Est . Price Manufacturer 1989 1990 Increase 1990 Set Donruss $ 22 $ 25 13.6 $ 24 Fleer 22 28 27.3 22 Score 18 20 11.1 22 Topps 20 22 10.0 25 Upper Deck 32 55 56.3 50 SOURCE : Baseball Cards magazine , Krause Publications Inc. , Iola , Wisc .