More than 1.2 million Americans will have heart attacks this year , and about 500,000 will die from heart disease . That death toll will exceed , by about 75,000 , the total number of battle deaths suffered by U.S. servicemen in all of this century 's wars . Can the appalling incidence of heart disease and related premature deaths be significantly reduced ? They can , if people are ready to do a little more to take better care of themselves . For example , a new report prepared by the National Heart , Lung and Blood Institute 's National Cholesterol Education Program concludes that heart disease could be reduced by 20 % if Americans simply ate less fats . That 's not a new idea . What gives it special heft is that this time it comes endorsed by the Food and Drug Administration , the American Medical Assn. , the American College of Physicians and more than 30 other major health groups . That 's about as close to an expression of unanimous opinion as the medical community is likely to produce . A key point of the report is that everyone from the age of 2 up , whether at known risk of heart disease or not , would benefit by cutting down on dietary fats and cholesterol . Specifically , no more than 30 % of calories eaten should come from fats of all kinds . And saturated fats , the kind found in butter , red meat , ice cream and tropical oils , should n't exceed 10 % of calories consumed . A basic aim is to lower blood cholesterol levels , which the report says would have `` unequivocal benefits '' in reducing heart disease . With a little information people can do a lot to limit dietary fats and reduce heart disease risks . One essential way of providing that data , the report emphasizes , is with expanded food labeling : Just how much total fat , saturated fat , cholesterol and calories are there in a can of chili , a take-out pizza , a frozen chicken dinner ? An increasing number of food manufacturers and restaurants are discovering the marketing value of providing such information ; health sells . Diet is n't the whole answer to lowering heart disease risks ; eliminating smoking , controlling high blood pressure , getting some exercise are all important . But diet is clearly a major component , and knowing more about what 's in the food we eat is clearly a vital step toward permitting healthier choices .