We may be going back to the age of the pristine white-enamel era , or what was described as `` the sanitary white kitchen '' of yesteryear , but accessorizing in color is still the fashion word in housewares today . It was in the late '20s when a rainbow of color began to radiate in home kitchens . According to `` The Housewares Story Book '' by Earl Lifshey , published by the National Housewares Assn . in Chicago , Macy 's was credited with originating the scheme . The New York store 's campaign ad , illustrating kitchen tools and accessories in Delft blue , apple green and mandarin red , ran a headline : `` Color Comes Into Your Kitchen . '' Although there were stages of avocado , copper-tone and harvest gold between then and now ( around the early '70s ) , the first group of standard colors adopted for kitchen accessories by the first color committee of the National Retail Dry Goods Assn . were white , kitchen green , ivory , delphinium blue , royal blue and red . They were actually a shade closer to the dominant colors we have now in some kitchen appliances and cookware . Colors on the Cabinets In cabinetwork , light is the word . John Pace , technical director in kitchen design at California Kitchens in Burbank , stated that the trend in kitchen cabinet finish is still in white or the pale natural tones . Wood-Mode , a cabinet manufacturer , for instance , now makes Alpine white as well as delicate pastel tones such as peach blush , Champagne and teal breeze . Millbrook makes beautifully crafted curved cabinets in exciting high-gloss colors of hunter green , pink , blue and red ; however , Pace said the white definitely has greater appeal . `` People are in the kitchen for many hours a day , so a shocking cabinet color might get on their nerves . When you go to white , you can accessorize , according to how bold you want to get -- say , a black fruit bowl or orange canister -- to give a room a different character . To be on the safe side , work with the spectrum chart , otherwise go with a pleasing contrast . '' Countertops can fill in for the one color needed in the kitchen . Colorful choices ran the gamut from pastel to bold in laminated marble-like or plain Formica countertops and nonporous synthetic marbles such as Nevamar 's Fountainhead , Corian and Avonite , to real granite . `` When using granite , avoid getting too heavy ; black and the darker shades can be overbearing ; the light tans and light reds are easier to live with , '' Pace advised . Smooth countertops may be running in favor with many homemakers , but tiles are again getting renewed attention . According to Pace , what has helped the industry is improvement in grouting with new colors and the introduction of a plasticizer to aid in cleaning , as well as new sealers to maintain the neat look of tiles . There 's no end to what you can do with tiles and they certainly provide color in the kitchen . In her new book called `` Country Floors ' Decorating With Tiles '' ( Simon and Shuster : $ 29.95 ) , crafts and design authority Rosyln Siegel writes , `` Choosing a color scheme depends on a number of factors : the colors you like best , the colors already in or near the room , the feeling you hope to convey and probably some of the color preferences you have absorbed from the current fashion trends . `` Certain color combinations suggest feelings and attitudes that are almost universal . Black and white convey a high-tech , modern look , while pink and yellow evoke a more delicate , romantic feeling . Combining pale colors provides a restful effect . Sharp contrasts , such as black and gold , and red and midnight blue , work to create drama . Unusual color combinations -- lilac and red , pink and green -- can be exciting and unsettling , a focal point in the room . '' The picturesque book is filled with beautiful tile designs from Country Floors , an international tile importing company . The author worked with top designers at Country Floors to discuss the elements of style in tile decorating , showing how to use color , pattern , size , shape and texture to achieve a desired look . Styles illustrated range from antique to traditional to contemporary , featuring such examples as romantic florals , geometrics , mosaics , picture tiles and murals , rustic and country . Currently attracting a lot of interest at Country Floors ' L.A. showroom is a group of wall tiles , which are made in America , called coloratura . Named the WT Series , this Technicolor aria consists of the largest range of colors with high-gloss glaze and evocative Art Deco borders . `` A lot of people are having fun with color , '' says Sheri Hirschfeld , showroom manager . `` The thing about these tiles is that you can work with them like a puzzle , mixing colors and geometric patterns . '' Other Country Floor tile selections with magnificent colors of teal , lilac , salmon and blue include rustic double-glazed tiles from France and Italy that you can mix and match with some of their stunning hand-painted picture tiles . A splash of color can come from a simple faucet . KWC 's hot red model adds a dash of color to its single levered Neodecor line of Swiss-made black , gray , white , chrome and almond faucets . `` A faucet is best seen and not heard '' is KWC 's logic in designing the quiet Neostar faucet , another line designed with no little nooks and crannies and one that uses a conical seated valve . Another KWC model is the Neodomo faucet , which is made with custom controls , adjusters that allow you to limit temperature and water flow for safe comfort and energy savings . This unit also features a retractable spray that lets you bring water a few feet away from the faucet . KWC also makes cover plates , soap dispensers and lotion dispensers to match faucet tones . Other manufacturers that have added color to their faucet lines are Moen International , Hansgrohe and Hansa America Inc. For sink color , consider selections from Kohler , which has long been known for vivid colored enameled cast-iron sinks . The trend however , according to Pace , is to use synthetic pure silicate quartz sinks such as those from Blanco or Gaggenau . Exceptionally easy to clean , this type of sink is not affected by strong staining liquids . To clean their sinks , homeowners like to use cleansers that will scrub off the glaze in porcelain sinks , exposing the metal , Pace said . The quartz pigmentation is done throughout , so that any chip on a white sink will still expose white , he added . Portable electric appliances and teakettles that are displayed on the counter or stove top can also supply a spot of color in the kitchen . Getting a positive consumer response with their empire green ( a pine or forest green ) gadgets ( such as the KitchenAid mixer , Chantal whistling teakettle , Krups coffee maker and grinder ) is Williams-Sonoma . Like the cobalt blue kitchen ware with which they started a trend , the green is projected to follow its successful footsteps , according to Anne Kupper , public relations director for the chain . `` Forest green , not the sickly avocado green , has always been popular for us in tablecloths and other accessories , '' Kupper explained . `` It 's a strong green , Mother Nature 's color that goes with anything . It goes with yellow and blue ; it 's a wonderful sharp contrast with white and with wood tones . Green is so fresh . We tried red but we were not as successful . '' Many people are just as happy getting colors from their cookware . Long known for introducing strong colors in their French cookware line in enameled cast iron , Le Creuset from Schiller and Asmus has just introduced four new colors this year . They include the oven-to-table Paris Tabletop line 's Southwestern colors of teal and apricot , as well as Carmine Red and shiny black . ( They still have white , slate blue , cobalt blue and flame . ) The new design cookware , which may be used for induction cooking , is called Le Creuset Nouveau and features Glissemail , a new , shiny porcelain finish that can withstand high temperatures and thermal shock . Remember the bright colored aluminum tumblers of the early '50s that you probably now spot in garage sales and thrift shops ? Sitlax now produces these in even brighter Neon Jewel tones . Tumblers , trays , coasters and wine buckets are available in neon tones of gold , blue , Kelly green , pink , red , violet , turquoise , magenta , black and silver . The tumblers are terrific with iced drinks -- remember how the exterior got very frosty ? Color in kitchen linens often follows fabrics in fashion . At the recent New York Fabric Show , the projection of the leading color , design and fabric influences moving into spring and summer of 1990 are , according to the Pantone Color Institute , influenced by a botanical garden of spring flowers : pastels , white and cream , dusty rose , rouge , cherry , peach , lavender , lilac , tourmaline , celadon , laurel green and primrose yellow . In the harvest hues are wheat , oat , flax , straw , maize , clay , earthy browns , herbal greens , sage , wild grasses and flowers , moss . Finally , influenced by world culture is a kaleidoscope of colors , contrasting with black , white , ivory and some metallics for accents : bright tropicals such as orchids , flamingo , turquoise ; foliage greens with white ; fiesta brights , red , orange , yellow , violet . . . and so forth . In other words , anything goes with color .