Historic Union Station has been sold and its owners plan extensive improvements for the 51-year-old building and possible future development to reestablish the nearly 50-acre site as a regional transportation hub , it was announced Monday . Santa Fe Pacific Realty said Monday that it bought the 22 % interest in the downtown station that Union Pacific Railroad has owned since 1939 . That 's when the railroad joined with the Southern Pacific and Santa Fe railroads to build the Los Angeles Union Passenger Terminal , as the Spanish-style , art-deco flavored depot is formally known . Terms of the deal , which involved an exchange of real estate , were not revealed . Santa Fe Pacific Realty disclosed that in the last month it bought the 44 % stake held by Southern Pacific for cash on Dec. 31 . The value of the deal was not revealed . The company also said it traded real estate for the 34 % stake owned by its sister company and former parent , Santa Fe Pacific Corp. , formerly known as Santa Fe Southern Pacific . The convoluted transaction is one of the more minor repercussions of the failed merger of the Santa Fe and Southern Pacific railroads . After that merger was disallowed by the Interstate Commerce Commission in 1987 , the Southern Pacific Railroad was sold and Chicago-based Santa Fe Pacific was radically restructured . Southern Pacific Railroad 's new owner , Philip Anschutz , began selling some non-rail properties , including the Union Station interest . `` Our acquisition of this landmark property will enable us to initiate an extensive improvement plan and to begin urban planning efforts aimed at reestablishing the facility as a regional transportation hub , '' said Vernon B. Schwartz , chief executive of Santa Fe Pacific Realty , based in San Francisco . Future development could include offices , stores and restaurants , said Ted Tanner , director of development for the property . But any project must await completion of construction of a Metro Rail station there , he said , adding that the station wo n't be finished for about two more years . In addition , Amtrak , which has provided passenger service at Union Station since 1971 , is about to move into new facilities on the property , which would free much of the station for renovation , he said . `` Our goal here clearly is to maintain and preserve the historic character of the building , '' Tanner said .