The National Transportation Safety Board on Monday began a thorough survey to determine the extent of damage done to the tanker Exxon Valdez when it ran aground March 24 in Alaska 's Prince William Sound . The physical inspection marked the first time that investigators have set foot on the ship that ran aground on a reef . The NTSB has been relying on photographs taken by divers who surveyed the ship 's damaged hull from the outside . But inspectors now will have the opportunity to step inside the Valdez and physically inspect its damaged hull , its holding tanks and a complex system of pipes and valves that load and unload oil . The NTSB will be accompanied by representatives from the state of Alaska , Exxon and Alyeska Pipeline Service Co. , the oil-company consortium that operates the trans-Alaskan pipeline . The investigation is being conducted at National Steel & Shipbuilding Co. , where the crippled tanker is in dry dock . `` We 're going to , in a quantitative way , determine the extent of damage , '' said Lou Colucciello , chief of the NTSB 's Washington , D.C.-based marine accident division . `` It 's being done with the participation of parties and will take several days . '' A Lot of Measurements Crews will `` make measurements to determine how deep the penetrations were , how extensive the damage was , '' Colucciello said . The survey team `` will do a lot of photographing and measurements , '' Colucciello said . `` We 'll spend lots of time collecting relevant facts on the accident . '' The Valdez , which was built in San Diego by Nassco , is a single-hulled ship . When the damage survey is completed , Nassco crews will repair an area 700 feet long and 100 feet wide . They also will repair any holding tanks and piping that are damaged . The NTSB report might not be completed for about six months , Colucciello said . The federal agency will analyze data gathered in the inspection and publish a report that will include the probable cause of the accident and any recommendations that might reduce the likelihood of a similar accident . In a related development , the state Department of Fish and Game late last week completed its involvement in the long-running saga of the Valdez by forwarding results of a final ocean-water test to the Coast Guard . The sample concluded that the Valdez was responsible for an oil slick that appeared in the ocean July 10 as the ship awaited permission to enter San Diego Bay , Reed Smith of the fish and game department said . A Coast Guard spokesman was not available on Monday to comment on whether charges will be filed against Exxon .