The future begins now for the St. Louis Cardinals , as far as Manager Joe Torre is concerned . The Cardinals have eight potential free agents and Torre will be exploring a number of options and sitting down high-priced veterans as the season winds down . `` We may see a mass exodus here , '' Torre said Tuesday . `` I knew that coming in , but if all the main players decide to walk at least we got a peek instead of waiting till spring training to see what they can do . '' The first move was calling up outfielder Ray Lankford from Triple A Louisville Monday to replace injured Pedro Guerrero . Lankford will play regularly in center field , moving Willie McGee , one of the potential free agents , to right field for the first time in his professional career . Lankford , 23 , was hitting .261 with 10 home runs , 72 RBIs and 28 stolen bases in his first season in Triple A. Lankford , who got his first start Tuesday night , has often been mentioned as the likely successor to McGee , who has played for Cardinals since 1982 . `` We want to get a good read on what we can expect from him , '' Torre said . `` The only way to do that is to really throw him out there . '' McGee is second in the National League in batting with a .339 average but has made a career-high 16 errors in center field . A few weeks ago he flung his glove into the stands after dropping a fly ball . Torre expects McGee to make the adjustment to right . `` He 's a good athlete , and he should n't have much problem , '' Torre said . While Guerrero is on the 15-day disabled list with a lower back injury , Torre also is moving rookie catcher Todd Zeile to first base and giving backup catcher Tom Pagnozzi a chance to play regularly . `` I talked to Todd Zeile . We know he 's a catcher . I 'm very impressed with his catching , '' Torre said . `` He seems to need a little more work with the receiving and the throwing , but it 's smooth . '' Pagnozzi , a backup the past four seasons , is hitting .266 . The odd man out is Milt Thompson , who has recently pulled out of a season-long slump .