Bird On a Wire ( Universal ) . Shooting in Vancouver . Mel Gibson , Goldie Hawn and David Carradine star in a John Badham-directed action comedy . Gibson is in the witness-protection program after nailing a drug lord , but the convict soon becomes a civilian and quickly collaborates with the government to locate Gibson and wreak revenge . Executive producers Ted Field and Robert Cort . Producer Rob Cohen . Screenwriters David Seltzer , Louis Venosta and Eric Lerner . Also stars Stephen Tobolowsky , Bill Duke and Joan Severance . Blaze ( Touchstone/A & M Films ) . Shooting in Louisiana . Paul Newman stars as Earl Long , the controversial Louisiana governor who became smothered in scandal when it was learned he was seeing stripper Blaze Starr -- sans pasties . `` Bull Durham 's '' Ron Shelton writes and directs with newcomer Lolita Davidovich as Blaze . Executive producers David V. Lester and Don Miller . Producers Dale Pollock and Gil Friesen . Distributor Buena Vista . Crazy People ( Paramount ) . Shooting in Virginia . John Malkovich stars in this comedy as an ad executive who is committed to a mental ward and soon recruits other loonies as part of his creative team . Executive producer Robert K. Weiss . Producer Tom Barad . Director/screenwriter Mitch Markowitz . Also stars Daryl Hannah . Winter release . Cry Baby ( Imagine ) . Shooting in Baltimore . Writer/director John Waters ' next extravaganza stars Johnny Depp in a '50s love story involving two youngsters from opposite sides of the tracks , if you will . Executive producer Jim Abrahams . Producer Rachel Talalay . Distributor Universal . Downtown ( Fox ) . Shooting in L.A. and Philadelphia . Richard Benjamin calls direction to Anthony Edwards and Forest Whitaker in this gritty actioner . Edwards is a cop who fouls up on the job , and so doing ends up with Whitaker on one of the tougher urban beats . Executive producer Gale Anne Hurd . Producer Charles H. Maguire . Screenwriter Nat Mauldin . The Two Jakes ( Eighty-Eight ) . Shooting in L.A. Jack Nicholson stars and directs what would be called the sequel to `` Chinatown . '' In this mystery , Nicholson reprises his Jake Gittes role as he joins another Jake ( Harvey Keitel ) to work the streets of 1940s Los Angeles . Robert Towne again scripts . Producers Robert Evans and Harold Schneider . Distributor Paramount . Winter release .