In their first public appearance since the March 10 bombing of their van on a La Jolla street , Navy Capt . Will Rogers III and his wife , Sharon , said Friday that Sharon Rogers will not be returning to her fourth-grade teaching position at the La Jolla Country Day School . Speaking at a news conference , the Rogerses sharply denounced the exclusive private academy for bowing to an apparent act of terrorism . Under the terms of a severance agreement with the school , Sharon Rogers , a 12-year veteran teacher there , will receive a lump sum payment of $ 135,000 , plus $ 5,000 for her attorney , and will not return to the campus , where school officials believe her presence would pose a risk to the safety of students and faculty . The FBI has been investigating the van bombing as a possible reprisal for Capt . Rogers ' order to shoot down an Iranian passenger jet that neared his ship , the guided missile cruiser Vincennes , in the Persian Gulf last summer . All 290 people aboard the plane were killed . `` Over the past weeks I have felt many different emotions , but today I am simply just disappointed , '' said Sharon Rogers , fighting back tears , `` more disappointed than I can possibly express . I will miss my relationship with the school . But most of all I will miss my students and their courageous and thoughtful parents . '' Both Capt . Rogers and his wife said they believe the van bombing was an act of terrorism . Mrs. Rogers added that the school , by barring her from campus , was sending out a message that it was bowing to terrorism . `` I feel very sad for our country , '' she said . Bernie Fipp , president of the school 's board of trustees , said in a letter Friday to the school 's parents and staff that safety was the prime motivator in the school 's decision that Sharon Rogers should not return to teach her fourth-graders . `` The school believed , and continues to believe , that Sharon 's presence on campus would pose an unreasonable risk to the children at the school , '' Fipp said . `` The school believes that the presence of the 24-hour federal protection now being offered to Sharon is evidence of the risks involved . '' The school , with 700 students and 67 teachers , has been the subject of intense criticism , both in San Diego and across the country -- including a pointed comment from the White House -- in the weeks following the attack . One of the toughest questions facing the school administration was why it moved so quickly to remove Rogers from the faculty , without waiting to see whether the FBI determines that the bombing was indeed a terrorist act . Other than confirming that the explosive device was a pipe bomb , FBI agents have declined to reveal the status of their continuing probe . Sharon Rogers was not injured in the van blast . Feeling a jolt and thinking that her van had been rear-ended , she had jumped from the vehicle moments before it was engulfed in flames . But she described that incident as a `` life-altering event '' highlighted by the ensuing battle over whether she would be allowed to return to her job . The Rogerses were escorted to the press conference at a Mission Valley hotel by a large contingent of security officials from the Naval Investigative Service . When they sat down before the microphones , the security detail posted itself at both entrances to the room and in the parking lot . Sharon Rogers maintained that the school would be secure with her there because of the added Navy protection . `` I think they would be very safe with the NIS agents there , '' she said . Timothy M. Burns , the school 's headmaster , who came under sharp criticism from some parents and teachers over his handling of the Rogers affair , could not be reached for comment Friday . Richard Roth , a Pasadena public relations specialist hired by the school , said the 18-member board 's vote Friday morning `` was not unanimous but overwhelmingly in favor of approval '' of the decision to sever ties with Rogers . Asked why the board agreed to pay her $ 135,000 , when her current-year contract is for $ 32,400 , Roth said : '' We want to avoid a legal action . Instead of paying legal fees ( from a lawsuit ) , we believe it is more appropriate to provide Sharon with this compensation . '' Capt . Rogers said he was disappointed in the way the school treated his wife , but said he was proud of the way she held up after suffering the horror of having a terrorist `` light a fireball under her van . '' `` I think that someone in the dead of night put a bomb on the undercarriage of my van and whoever that person was , is a terrorist , '' Sharon Rogers said . Her husband added , `` I think they will run aground and they will be brought to justice . Whether it 's a state-sponsored act or an individual act or a disgruntled sailor , whatever it will be , it will all come to light . '' He also said he sympathized with the intense media and community scrutiny his wife had faced . `` I had the misfortune of being at the center of my 15 minutes of fame earlier , '' he said , referring to his decision to shoot down the Iranian plane . While Mrs. Rogers said that recent events have dramatically changed her life , she said she plans to immediately begin seeking work at another school in the San Diego area . `` I 'm going to start pounding the pavement next week , '' she said . `` I 'm going to update my resume and hit the bricks on Monday . ''