Thunderstorms played havoc with outdoor events Sunday at the U.S. Olympic Festival , turning the spotlight indoors , where Olympic champion wrestlers Kenny Monday and Dave Schultz battled just to get into the festival . Monday , the 1988 Olympic gold medalist from Stillwater , Okla. , earned a 6-3 victory over Schultz , 1984 Olympic gold medalist , which led to Schultz 's elimination from the 163.5-pound freestyle wrestling mini-tournament . Monday won two more matches in the evening to advance . `` I thought it would be a little closer , '' said Monday , who wrestled at Oklahoma State . `` I thought I was in control , but I never thought I had the match won . In freestyle , you ca n't afford to give up , especially with a guy like Dave Schultz . You never know what he 's going to pull . '' Schultz , who coached the national team before deciding to return to competition , could n't pull out anything . `` I wrestled real poor , real poor , '' he said . `` I 've got nothing good to say about the way I wrestled . '' The mini-tournament at 163.5 was loaded with former champions , including the two Olympic gold medalists and five National Collegiate Athletic Assn . champions . Monday defeated David Lee , the NCAA champion this year from Wisconsin , and Eddie Urbano , a former NCAA title winner from Arizona State , exchanging words with Urbano after the 6-1 victory . At 125.5 pounds , identical twins Tony and Nick Purler of Wentzville , Mo. , refused to wrestle each other , keeping a pact they made in the eighth grade . Because Tony won on injury default -- although no injury exists -- Nick also could continue to compete in the mini-tournament . `` I petitioned in at 125 and he petitioned in at 114 but was unable to make weight , '' Tony said . `` We drew each other . That 's never happened before in a blind draw . It 's only right that he should default . `` It stinks that that had to happen , but he did n't make weight . '' In the boxing semifinals , three of four U.S. amateur titlists advanced . But super heavyweight Larry Donald of Cincinnati won a unanimous decision over national champion Eddie Donerlson Jr. Donald , a shoe salesman who began boxing only two years ago , predicted a gold medal was in his future . `` You 're going to see some big things come Tuesday night ( against Kelvin Richardson ) , '' he said . The amateur champions who won were four-time national titlist Brian Lonon at 112 pounds ; Frank Pena at 125 pounds ; and Chris Byrd at 156 pounds . In afternoon basketball , the East women remained unbeaten with a 66-61 victory over the West as Valeria Whiting of Stanford had 10 points and 10 rebounds . The teams combined for 48 turnovers . `` There are times when you say it 's a shame that anyone had to lose a ballgame . Today was one that it 's a shame anyone had to win , '' East Coach Chris Gobrecht said . The East men beat the West,94-87 , in overtime . Todd Day of Arkansas scored 16 points , including five in overtime .