A special investigator 's report to major league baseball on Pete Rose 's alleged gambling , made public Monday by a Cincinnati judge , accuses the Cincinnati Reds ' manager of betting not only on major league games but on his own team 's games as well , from 1985 to 1987 . Lawyers for Rose won a temporary restraining order Sunday , preventing baseball from conducting a hearing with Rose -- one was scheduled for today -- until at least July 6 . But the Ohio Supreme Court , responding to a suit filed Monday by the Cleveland Plain Dealer , ordered Judge Norbert A. Nadel of Hamilton County Common Pleas Court to release the report or explain why . Nadel , the same judge who Sunday had issued the temporary restraining order , complied reluctantly with the court 's order . The 225-page report , compiled after a four-month investigation by baseball investigator John M. Dowd , implicates Rose as having gambled extensively on baseball and Reds ' games . `` The testimony and the documentary evidence gathered in the course of the investigation demonstrates that Pete Rose bet on baseball , and , in particular , on games of the Cincinnati Reds baseball club , during the 1985 , 1986 and 1987 seasons , '' Dowd wrote in the report . A key element in the report is the transcript of Dowd 's interview with Ron Peters , an Ohio bookmaker with whom Rose allegedly placed baseball bets of up to $ 2,000 a game . The exchange : Dowd : And when he bet baseball , did he bet on the Cincinnati Reds ? Peters : Yes , he did . Dowd : And this was at a time that he was manager of the Cincinnati Reds ? Peters : Yes , sir . Dowd : Is there any doubt in your mind ? Peters : Absolutely not . Peters pleaded guilty recently to charges of tax evasion and conspiracy to distribute cocaine . Whether Rose bet on Reds ' games is the critical element in the case , since gambling on one 's own baseball team has traditionally carried a lifetime ban from the sport . Eight members of the Chicago White Sox were given lifetime bans in the wake of revelations that gamblers had rigged the 1919 World Series . Paul Janszen of Cincinnati , who was serving a six-month sentence for tax evasion when the report was compiled but who has since been released , testified that he placed baseball bets for Rose with Peters from April 17 , 1987 , through May 13 , 1987 . The report details specific incidents , described by Janszen , of Rose placing bets with Tommy Gioiosa , a one-time house guest of Rose , on the 1986 National League playoffs between the New York Mets and Houston Astros . Rose , since the investigation began , has admitted betting on other sports but had denied throughout that he ever bet on baseball games . The report also shows that during his deposition , Rose was shown gambling sheets , which investigators allege show Rose bet on baseball games , and that expert analysis showed the sheets were in Rose 's handwriting . Rose has denied the writing was his . Another section describes Gioiosa 's paying Peters $ 24,000 in Rose 's alleged gambling debts at a cafe in Franklin , Ohio , in 1986 . Peters recalled Gioiosa bringing him three $ 8,000 checks , all payable to cash and signed by Rose . Peters , according to testimony , told Gioiosa to cash the checks because he did not want his name on them . Gioiosa then cashed the checks and paid Peters in cash . Dowd wrote in the report that Peters ' recollection of the incident is supported by Rose 's own bank records . Rose is also accused in the report by Janszen of placing bets in New York and using Michael Bertolini of New York as his runner . Janszen said that Rose `` within a three-month period of time . . . was in debt over $ 400,000 to the bookie in New York via Mike Bertolini , in baseball betting alone . '' Rose denied ever placing bets with Bertolini .