Doctors have become embroiled in a delicate ethical debate after a recent study suggested that patients with sickle-cell anemia may avoid transfusion complications if given blood donated by blacks . At issue is whether blood banks should ask donors to volunteer information about their racial backgrounds , making the search for compatible blood easier , and whether blood banks should routinely provide extensive protein-matching of donor and recipient blood . Both procedures would decrease the chances of sickle-cell patients developing transfusion complications , but they would also require more money and raise serious issues of confidentiality . More than 90 % of the nearly 60,000 people nationwide with sickle-cell disease -- an inherited blood disorder that affects blacks almost exclusively -- have received at least one transfusion before the age of 18 . Roughly 30 % of these patients , however , develop antibodies against foreign proteins called antigens in the blood they receive , a condition known as alloimmunization . Once antibodies form , it becomes increasingly difficult -- and sometimes nearly impossible -- to find compatible blood for subsequent transfusions , increasing the likelihood that recipients will suffer from transfusion reactions such as jaundice , severe anemia and kidney disease . The research suggests that genetic differences in certain blood antigens between whites and blacks may explain , in part , why sickle-cell patients make antibodies , said Dr. Elliott P. Vichinsky , co-author of a recent study published in the New England Journal of Medicine . Researchers at Children 's Hospital in Oakland found that 30 % of the 107 black sickle-cell anemia patients studied who received transfusions developed antibodies . Moreover , the scientists discovered that 82 % of the antibodies sickle-cell patients produced were against four antigens that commonly occur in blood donated from whites . In the study , 90 % of the blood transfused was donated by whites . `` For sickle-cell patients who have already developed antibodies , knowing which donors are black could mean a smaller haystack to go looking for the needle in , '' said Dr. Samuel Charache , a hematologist at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine in Baltimore . In an accompanying editorial , Charache encourages blood banks and physicians to debate the merits of asking donors to indicate their race , and keeping the information confidential . Despite suggestions that blacks with sickle-cell anemia may benefit from blood donors volunteering information about race , the procedure also raises ethical issues . `` Black blood for black people and white blood for white people sounds like a white water fountain for white people and a colored water fountain for colored people . It could be twisted into something totally awful , '' Charache said . The problem of providing sickle-cell patients with racially matched blood is compounded by a tremendous lack of black donors . A 1986 American Red Cross survey found that 95 % of all blood donors surveyed were white , while 4 % were black . Some medical experts , while agreeing that knowledge of a donor 's race may help in finding more compatible blood for sickle-cell patients , worry about the misuse of such information . Dr. Darlene Powers , a pediatric hematologist at the USC Medical Center , is concerned that , because blacks tend to carry fewer of the most potent antigens that cause transfusion reactions , it is possible that blood designated for the benefit of sickle-cell patients might be given to whites for a variety of reasons , she said . To avoid such controversies , some physicians recommend that blood banks simply provide antigen-matched ( rather than race-specific ) blood to sickle-cell patients even before antibodies develop . But for various reasons , blood banks argue that such a service would lead to increased costs and unnecessary delays . Dr. Steven Kleinman of the Los Angeles County American Red Cross said providing antigen-matched blood is less expensive and better matches can be found if matching is done only for those who develop antibodies to previous transfusions . Moreover , transfusing all sickle-cell patients with antigen-matched blood would probably exhaust the rare blood supply and result in transfusion delays , he said . Dr. Gerald Sandler , medical director of the national American Red Cross in Washington , D.C. , remains firm in his stand against altering the Red Cross blood banking program , which provides half of the nation 's blood supply . Sandler remains confident that the Red Cross can continue to meet the needs of sickle-cell patients through the rare-donor registry program . `` We do n't have to invoke race to find a satisfactory solution to the problem . '' Yet Vichinsky says the crisis for sickle-cell patients `` will increase with time unless there 's a shift in transfusion practices . ''