Jailhouse informant Leslie Vernon White , an admitted drug abuser and small-time criminal who for years bought his freedom by testifying for prosecutors , has now become an expert witness for the defense . Unlike an ordinary witness who has to stick to what he has seen or heard , an expert is allowed to give opinions in his field . Usually , the field is a lofty one , such as science or medicine . But White 's area of expertise is the behavior of jailhouse informants . And his expert opinion is that most of them lie . `` I base that on 12 years experience of watching them lie , '' he explained . Tall , lean , with bad teeth and a half-dozen prison tattoos , including a swastika , White is far from the typical suited expert with a professorial air . Because he is in custody on a purse-snatching conviction , he testifies in jail clothes . And , because law enforcement officials are no longer among his friends , he is sometimes forced to wear chains -- something he said never happened while he was testifying for prosecutors . Why White switched sides is a mystery . Some who know him theorize that he had exhausted his usefulness to the prosecution . Others suggest he just got fed up with lying . White says he quit for love . He wanted to show his ex-wife that he could be a better person . Since March , judges at three murder trials in Los Angeles , San Bernardino and Solano counties have allowed him to testify as an expert . White has been paid for each appearance -- as is customary for an expert -- once by the court and twice by the defense . He received an average of $ 500 a case . In each instance , White testified that the prosecution 's informants could have made up their stories . Although his performance earned good reviews from defense attorneys , its effect on juries was unclear . One case ended in a conviction , another in an acquittal and a third in a hung jury . White 's most impressive claim to expertise remains the convincing demonstration he gave last fall showing that confessions can be faked . Los Angeles County sheriff 's deputies supplied him with the name of an inmate who was a suspect in a murder case . White then posed as a law enforcement official and , using a jail telephone , got other officials to divulge details of the case . Continuing his pose , White created a record that he and the suspect had shared a cell . Decade of Experience White 's credentials as an expert include a decade of experience . In that time , he claims he provided information to police in an estimated 150 cases and lied in three-quarters of them . He says he testified as an informant in 16 cases and lied under oath in three of them . This is a dangerous admission , because White could be prosecuted for perjury . But he believes he is safe in the three cases because the statute of limitations or other developments bar prosecution . He wo n't say whether he lied under oath in the other 13 cases , unless authorities formally grant him immunity . White says he wants to tell the truth , but without immunity prosecutors would `` bury me . '' `` Hypothetically , '' he said in an interview , `` I think I 've told the truth in two cases . '' White says he feels no remorse for framing other inmates . That , he says , is because he has no conscience . `` Does it bother you . . . about having committed perjury and having sent people to jail ? '' he once was asked in court . `` Not a bit , '' White replied . A Source of Concern Still , White claims to be troubled by the behavior of some prosecutors and police . He says they knew for more than 10 years that he was a liar , but relied on him anyway to testify that other inmates had confessed . White 's allegations of law enforcement misconduct are part of an ongoing probe by the Los Angeles County Grand Jury . In his expert testimony , the veteran informant said law enforcement officials knew for certain in two instances that he intended to lie under oath , but did not try to stop him . In other cases , he said , police fed him details of crimes , then sat back and waited for him to come forward and claim a suspect had confessed those details to him . `` I 've had . . . law enforcement officers come down to the jail , put their foot up on the desk and tell me the complete details of a homicide from A to Z , including what the suspect drove and the fact of what color his car phone was , without stating a reason , '' White testified . In such instances , White said , the police did not have to tell him to fake confessions . They simply knew he would . Giving him inside information , White once told the court , was `` like taking a car and putting the car on the hill and taking the emergency brake off . It 's going to go down . There 's no stopping it . '' Serving a Sentence White , 31 , is serving a nearly six-year prison sentence for purse snatching and failure to appear in court -- an extraordinarily severe penalty imposed after his demonstration triggered an ongoing review of Los Angeles County murder cases involving informants . His expert testimony includes some of the strategies he says he used so successfully over the years . White testified , for instance , how he would try to figure out what information detectives wanted and then would supply it . `` You just simply sell them what they want and they buy all the time , '' he explained . In most cases where informants are used , he said , detectives `` are desperate for testimony or information to corroborate their theory of the case . '' Even in some cases where police already had an informant , White said there are ways to become involved . One sure way , he has testified , is to claim to have information that a defendant was trying to arrange to have a prosecutor or detective killed . Even when he had nothing to offer , White said , he would still try to call homicide detectives whenever he landed in jail . `` When you 're coming down ( from drugs after an arrest ) , you 're extremely hungry and they do n't like you to smoke in the cell , '' he testified , `` so I make a call to homicide and get candy and cigarettes . '' Never Fails to Work '' They always good for that ? '' asked a defense attorney . `` Always , '' White replied . While White portrayed some law enforcement officials as cynical and manipulative , he said others are honest and on the lookout for phony confessions . Accordingly , he said , a confession should n't be perfect . Even if all sorts of details are available from the coroner 's office -- an easy place to obtain information such as where and how many times a victim was shot , White says -- it is best to leave out some of them . In his expert testimony and in a series of interviews , White also provided information to support his claim that Los Angeles authorities had known for years that he lied . A generally nonviolent drug abuser , White first was committed to the California Youth Authority at the age of 8 for being `` incorrigible . '' He said he began his career as an informant as a 19-year-old in 1977 . He said Los Angeles police detectives quickly discovered how resourceful and unreliable he was . In jail for a series of robberies , White said he became a suspect in a murder . Although White said he knew nothing about the murder , he decided to string police along because they offered him a trip to the California Youth Authority , instead of adult prison , if he informed on other suspects in the case . White said he persuaded police that he was at the house where the murder took place by describing it in detail . An investigator he had hired to help prepare his defense in the robbery case provided him with the description by taking photographs of the house . White said he eventually ended his ruse by showing police the photographs . Proves Unreliable Los Angeles sheriff 's homicide detectives apparently learned of his unreliability the following year . In that instance , White said he involved himself in an outrageous plot with one of his foster fathers , who was also a criminal . White falsely accused the foster father of kidnaping and killing a 2-year-old Ventura girl . He told authorities his foster father confessed to him over the phone . But White said he needed to be released from jail so that he could speak with his foster father in person to obtain more details . The foster father , who was to be paid for his role , instead alerted Los Angeles sheriff 's homicide detectives , White said . Ventura Sheriff 's Lt. Ernie Rogers , who was assigned to investigate the killing , recalled that he found White to be `` a complete liar . . . I 'm sure I told L.A. detectives about it and went on my merry way . '' Two years later , in 1980 , the Los Angeles district attorney 's office was formally told that White was unreliable . White , who then was in state prison for kidnaping , wrote the district attorney 's office , saying he was paid by prosecutors and police to lie on the witness stand . `` I can prove this and I will take polygraph tests and supply names of officials who are involved , '' White wrote . Referred to State Because its own staff was being accused of wrongdoing , the district attorney 's office referred the case to the state attorney general 's office . That agency investigated , then notified the district attorney 's office that `` our final appraisal was that White . . . lacked credibility . '' But , the very next year , the district attorney 's office employed White as an informant-witness . The district attorney 's office had him transferred from state prison where he was serving a sentence for kidnaping to the more comfortable Long Beach jail . Then a prosecutor helped him obtain a series of eight court rulings from the county 's chief criminal court judge , each ordering that White be freed for as long as a week at a time . White claims that he ended his relationship with the district attorney 's office last year because he wanted to change his life . He hoped to win back his ex-wife , he said , by proving to her he could go straight . Knowing that he could no longer deal with prosecutors , he reasoned , might give him the willpower to stop using drugs and stop committing crimes . It did n't work . Before his latest jailing earlier this year , White said he spent his last few days of freedom getting high . `` I did n't accomplish nothing for myself , '' he said in an interview . `` Nothing . ''