Environmental Diagnostics Inc. is learning to let go . Four years ago , the North Carolina-based manufacturer of medical test kits gave birth to Disease Detection International in Irvine . Begun as one of Environmental Diagnostics ' divisions , Disease Detection went public in 1987 . Former Secretary of the Interior James G. Watt left his position as chairman at Environmental Diagnostics to run the new company . Ever since then , the two firms have fought over various technology rights . Environmental Diagnostics last year even launched an unsuccessful proxy battle to gain control of Disease Detection , which also makes test kits . But Environmental Diagnostic has apparently given up and has begun to systematically sell its huge stake in Disease Detection . This week , the company disclosed in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission that it has sold nearly 1.9 million shares of Disease Detection for about $ 300,000 . `` We still feel as strong as we did when we embarked on a proxy battle to replace their board directors that we are not satisfied with the management of DDI , '' said Peter Heath , Environmental Diagnostics ' controller . `` That situation has not changed . '' For its part , Disease Detection claims not to care that Environmental Diagnostics is unloading its shares . `` That 's fine with us , '' said H. Thad Morris , Disease Detection 's president . Since September , Environmental Diagnostics has sold 6.5 million of its 32.1 million shares of Disease Detection . The sales -- coupled with a stock offering by Disease Detection -- has reduced Environmental Diagnostic 's stake in the company from 27.2 % to 17.2 % Heath said his company would sell even more of its shares of Disease Detection but SEC rules say a corporate investor can not sell more than 1 % of any company in a 90-day period . `` We think there is no value to us holding on to it , '' Heath said . Disease Detection , which has 28 employees , reported sales for the first quarter ended March 31 of $ 88,104 and it lost nearly four times that -- $ 323,983 . The company 's stock is worth a quarter a share . Environmental Diagnostics is still on the critical list too . The company had sales during the first quarter of $ 788,000 but lost $ 773,000 . Its stock closed Friday at $ 1.09 . Helionetics Inc. in Irvine said its common stock began trading on NASDAQ Friday under the symbol HLXC . The electrical equipment manufacturer 's common stock also trades on the Pacific Stock Exchange under the symbol HLX.P .