RECENTLY , I said David Geffen , the Wunderkind of Hollywood , is ready to bring Broadway 's hit `` Dreamgirls '' to the screen . It was noted then that Spike Lee had been rumored as a possible director . But here is who will actually direct `` Dreamgirls '' -- none other than Frank Oz , the voice of Miss Piggy on `` The Muppets . '' Oz will also take a crack at writing the screenplay . There is also a possibility that Michael Peters , who shared the 1982 Tony Award with the late Michael Bennett for the musical 's stage choreography , may do the dances for the film . ANN-MARGRET is wowing Chicago now with her dazzling song-and-dance act . But she meets this weekend with producer Linda Yellen to talk about starring in `` Hiroshima Maidens . '' This is a true story , based on the book by Rodney Barker . It tells how a Connecticut matron took in three of the `` maidens , '' victims of the U.S. atomic attack on Japan which ended World War II . The story tells of the effect this gesture had on the woman , her community and the scarred young women . If the beautiful Swede says yes , then Yellen will produce this remarkable tale for Aaron Spelling Productions . And John Erman , who guided Ann-Margret through recent TV hits -- `` A Streetcar Named Desire '' and `` The Two Mrs. Grenvilles '' -- will probably direct . A BIG drum roll , hot rockets and a swirl of fanfare for Peter Martins . His new ballet , `` Fearful Symmetries , '' made its New York City Ballet debut at Lincoln Center this week and is an utter triumph ! What a relief -- this great cultural institution , founded by Georges Balanchine and Lincoln Kirstein , and carried on brilliantly by Jerome Robbins , has -- in recent years -- been under siege . There have been attacks by the New Yorker and Vanity Fair magazines , and behind-the-scenes `` civil wars . '' But thanks to Peter Martins and the unflagging support of many important and dedicated benefactors , the City Ballet has regained its beautiful `` legs . '' `` Fearful Symmetries '' is just super , one of the best experiences I 've enjoyed at ballet in years . It is set to fabulous music by California 's John Adams and is being danced by a wonderful group -- Heather Watts , Merrill Ashley , Alexandre Proia , Jock Soto , Margaret Tracey , Jeffrey Edwards and the corps de ballet . The scarlet , mauve and burnt-orange costumes by Steven Rubin are dramatic eye-catchers . I NOTE that the production was made possible by a generous gift from Carolyne and Henry Kravis . Well , dance mavens are in their debt . It was hard to believe during this exciting benefit evening in the New York State Theater that the night 's two blond chairwomen-dynamos , Anne Bass and Ivana Trump , were `` women scorned . '' They both looked so glamorous , jolly and carefree that even though they 've been dragged through the tabloids by the defections of their respective husbands , they appear to be `` anything but . '' ALMOST EVERY great name in theater will hit the Plaza in New York today at noon for the Drama League 's 56th Annual Distinguished Performance Awards luncheon . I 'll be there presenting to the fabled Texas tornado Tommy Tune .