After 2 1/2 euphoric months since qualifying for this summer 's World Cup in Italy , the U.S. national soccer team hit the Orange Bowl 's prescription turf hard Friday night . Costa Rica , another World Cup qualifier but hardly a world power , scored in the ninth minute and was virtually unchallenged for the remainder of the game in a 2-0 victory before a crowd of about 20,000 in the first round of the Marlboro Cup . That relegates the United States to the third-place game Sunday afternoon against Colombia , which lost to Uruguay , 2-0 . That was the second game Friday night , when the crowd grew to 25,392 as additional fans came to watch the more exciting and skillful South American style of soccer . Uruguay , which scored both goals in the final 13 minutes , will meet Costa Rica Sunday night for the championship . In comments to his players after the game , U.S. Coach Bob Gansler lectured them about their lack of effort . But he told reporters later that he did not expect much more from the players than they gave him considering that they had not played a game since Nov. 19 . `` We knew that our players needed some time off , and now we 're starting to build them up again , '' he said . `` We did n't look good , but it 's more a matter of fitness and timing than it is ability . This is our first preseason game . '' But the players did not let themselves off so easily . They beat themselves up after the game as badly as Costa Rica did during it . `` The coach made it plain and simple , '' said goalkeeper Tony Meola , who allowed no goals in his four World Cup qualifying games last year . `` We did n't have a hell of a lot of intensity . '' The most critical player was Hugo Perez , usually a midfielder but a forward in this game as Gansler experimented with his lineup . Perez said some of the U.S. players were too impressed with themselves after qualifying for the World Cup from the North and Central American and Caribbean region ( CONCACAF ) . Costa Rica , which split two games with the United States last year , is the other qualifier from that region . `` We have n't done anything ; we 're nothing , '' he said . `` We qualified from CONCACAF , the worst region in the World Cup . The trouble is we think we 're superstars . We 've got to play more as a team . ''