Rewind the basketball VCR , back to a time when a kid named Earvin -- not yet Magic -- wore out the sidewalks of Lansing , Mich. , with his incessant dribbling . The game revolved around centers . Wilt posted up , Wilt got the ball , Wilt dunked . Russell swatted away shot after shot . `` Sky hook '' entered the vernacular . Now fast-forward to 1990 . Earvin has long since become Magic , joined by friends known as Isiah , K.J . and Stockton . They do not play center , but now the game revolves around them . With all necessary apologies to Patrick Ewing , Akeem Olajuwon and David Robinson , centers just are n't enough anymore . Basketball has grown , stretched , quickened . Point guards are hip . Got a great point guard ? You 're in the hunt . Got an ordinary one ? Forget it . Just ask Akeem . `` It 's harder to find a great point guard than a player at any other position , '' Utah Jazz president Frank Layden says . `` It requires more skills , and the biggest is to be a decision-maker . '' The importance of great point men intensifies the search . The Jazz dipped into Spokane , Wash. , in 1984 , plucking unheralded John Stockton from unheralded Gonzaga University . Projected as Rickey Green 's backup , Stockton instead became a star . As Utah knows , that does not automatically mean a championship ring ; it 's simply a key piece to the puzzle . Each of the last two NBA Finals have matched Magic Johnson and Isiah Thomas , good buddies and top-flight point guards . Glen Rice may have scored bushels of points , but Rumeal Robinson was equally important to Michigan 's NCAA title team last spring . Pete Newell , who coached Cal to the national championship in 1959 and now scouts for the Cleveland Cavaliers , sees this as no coincidence . `` You 'll have a hard time winning a championship without a great point guard , '' Newell says . And today , `` great point guard '' has wider meaning than in the past . Point guards once did not worry about scoring . Dribble , organize , pass . Keep teammates happy . Maurice Cheeks , now with San Antonio , epitomizes that kind of point guard . As he climbed the basketball ladder , his job description seemed clear . Be a playmaker . `` That 's it , '' Cheeks says . `` Just pass . Nothing else . It was never in my makeup to score 20-25 points a game . `` Now these guys are more able to score . It 's a time for younger guys who can score and penetrate . They 're more versatile . '' They score , they penetrate , they pass , they lead . Stockton and Kevin Johnson , widely considered the leading point guards for the '90s , have firmly put an end to the old style . Johnson last season became only the fifth player in NBA history to average at least 20 points and 10 assists ( joining Magic , Thomas , Nate Archibald and Oscar Robertson ) . Stockton averaged 17.1 points and a league-high 13.6 assists . They are the wave of the future for several reasons . As defenses expand -- more double-teaming , more traps and thinly veiled zones -- coaches want swift point guards who can rush the ball upcourt , create fast breaks or at least start the offense quickly . And since the point guard most often has the ball , he must be a threat to shoot the jump shot or drive to the basket . Forget about poor-shooting , 10-points-per-game stuff . `` That 's out , '' Magic says , grimacing and shaking his head . `` All these guys can score . You 've got to be a 17-12 man , or 17-11 . That ( 10 points ) just does n't get it . The defense will let you have the shot . '' Since this is a story about point guards , we 'll let Johnson have the first shot . He has earned it . THE MAGIC MAN Most conventional concepts of the point guard took a beating in the late 1970s . A tall guy with a wide smile emerged from Everett High School in Lansing , then moved on to nearby Michigan State . They called him Magic . They said he played the point . Jerry Reynolds , the Kings ' director of player personnel , remembers his reaction . `` When I first heard about him in college as a 6-9 point guard , I said , 'Oh , B.S . You 're saying he 's a point guard , but he really is n't , ' `` Reynolds recalls . `` Then I saw him , and he really was a point guard . `` It was like seeing the pyramids for the first time . '' Earvin Johnson handled the basketball as if he were 5-foot-9 . He loved to push the ball upcourt , where he could creatively pass off to teammates . He had a funky , ugly set shot -- which he made just 46 percent of the time in college -- but then , point guards did not need a great shot . Neither did most 6-9 players . Johnson just never fit the traditional role of a big man , comfortable only within an arm 's reach of the basket . `` I was tall , but I could always dribble , '' he says . `` Everywhere I went as a kid -- to the store , wherever -- I dribbled . I became a point guard because I dribbled so much . `` And passing always gave me just as much satisfaction ( as shooting ) . To make a good pass was like a rush , a high , and it still is . '' Johnson grew up admiring Nate Archibald , taking ideas for passes from Kevin Porter and Pete Maravich . Porter played for Johnson 's home state Detroit Pistons , and he still holds the NBA single-game record of 29 assists . That mark -- and not much else -- has eluded Johnson . His magical act , which took Michigan State to the '79 NCAA title , became an instant NBA hit . In Johnson 's very first season , 1979-80 , he and skyhook inventor Kareem Abdul-Jabbar led the Los Angeles Lakers to the league championship . In Kareem 's first four seasons in Los Angeles , the Lakers never won a title . When a great point guard arrived , they immediately did . Johnson has since added four more rings to his collection . In becoming the player most synonymous with winning since Bill Russell , he sparked a fashionable trend in high schools and on playgrounds across America . Suddenly , tall kids wanted to handle the ball . Their coaches may not have trashed the idea as quickly as they once did -- `` Well , if Magic can do it ... '' -- but no replica showed up in the '80s . `` We get carried away with Magics , '' says Lee Rose , formerly a successful college coach and now the Milwaukee Bucks ' director of player personnel . `` We think everybody 's going to be a Magic . Hell , there 's only one Magic . `` His ability to find those open men is n't necessarily because he 's 6-9 . A lot of people that height can not do what he does . '' If anything , point guards have shrunk since Johnson 's entrance . His chief rivals in the league today -- Thomas , Stockton , Kevin Johnson -- all must stretch to exceed six feet . Many respected basketball people hesitate to drop Magic Johnson into this group . Jerry West , a decent player in his day , harkens back to earlier times when speaking of Johnson -- when guards were guards . `` Magic 's a guard , because he can do everything , '' says West , now the Lakers ' general manager . `` If you watch him , Magic is a pretty simple player . He just has charisma . `` When Magic was born , they sprinkled a little extra gold dust on him . '' So how exactly do we measure Johnson 's impact on the position ? He clearly brought focus and attention to point men . He helped accelerate the game into the open court , where guards have more impact than centers . And passing became a bit more chic . `` I 'd say I 've made people aware of being a passer , '' Magic says . `` Players now are conscious of doing that . Since that 's happened , I feel good about it . '' THE EVOLUTION For all his wondrous achievements , Johnson did not hang around the peach basket with James Naismith . It only seems as if Magic were there , offering suggestions about how to position players in this new game . Actually , the key moments in the evolution of the point guard are easily distinguishable . The first sign of life occurred when big men stopped jumping so often . `` Before the war , guards were great big plodding guys , because there was a center-jump after every basket , '' Newell says . `` The fast break started back then , with the elimination of the center jump . '' Then in 1954 , a major rule change forever changed the role of point guards . Dismayed by slowdown strategy and low-scoring games , Syracuse Nationals owner Danny Biasone introduced the 24-second clock . Suddenly , point guards such as Bob Cousy , Slater Martin and Dick McGuire spent less time dribbling around , protecting leads and shooting free throws . The clock made teams PLAY and made point guards do more than handle the ball . Twenty-five years later , another new rule completed the shape of today 's game . When the league adopted the three-point shot in 1979 , defenses had even more to worry about .