Ben Davidian relishes the fact that he 's visited just about every outpost under his jurisdiction as the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service 's top official in the West . He remembers a visit he paid Christmas Eve on unsuspecting Border Patrol agents near Nogales , Ariz. '' Can we do something for you ? '' several uniformed agents asked Davidian , not recognizing him to be the INS Western regional commissioner . `` Well , '' he replied , `` I was hoping to do something for you . '' After a few more questions , the embarrassed agents figured out who Davidian was . `` I 'll say this , '' one agent later confided , `` any man who wants to freeze his buns with us on the Mexican border on Christmas Eve is OK by me . '' The episode seems to say much about the 38-year-old Sacramento lawyer in the six months since he succeeded the controversial and colorful Harold Ezell as one of four regional INS commissioners in the United States . He enjoys meeting many of the immigration service 's 5,500 employees in his sprawling region that encompasses California , Nevada , Arizona , Hawaii and the Pacific island of Guam . The problem , according to his critics , is that he is n't meeting the right kind of people . Davidian has been attacked -- both inside and outside the INS -- as being an `` invisible commissioner '' who is afraid to meet with adversaries in the immigration field who are interested in finding out his views on important issues . He also has been accused of being a weak leader and being afraid of making decisions that might anger superiors in Washington . Part of the criticism stems from Davidian 's avowed intention to reverse Ezell 's publicity-seeking posture and turn the spotlight back to the `` hard-working , dedicated ( INS ) men and women in the field . '' For example , he makes no apology for the fact that he has not yet held a news conference to articulate his views or those of the INS . In doing so , critics believe Davidian 's silence has helped undermine the morale of many INS bureaucrats and has given a subtle message to Southern California 's large immigrant population that it can expect little help from him . `` He 's an invisible commissioner who has done little to reach out to immigrant communities , '' said Linda Mitchell , a top official with a coalition of immigrant rights groups in Los Angeles . `` I mean , who knows who he is ? '' Ernest Gustafson , who retired last September as INS district director in Los Angeles , added : `` My concern is that the silence out of the INS is very negative for the community . It could develop into a curtain blocking the INS from the communities it is trying to serve . `` Six months have gone by and we do n't know anything new about him or the INS . '' Davidian rejected the criticism , saying that controversy comes with the territory . `` This is a job that is not going to make friends with everybody , '' Davidian said in an interview at INS regional headquarters in Laguna Niguel . `` You can not have a job that deals with enforcement as well as service and expect everybody to like what you do . '' Several problems have cropped up that critics say could have been avoided if Davidian were a more aggressive executive : * The post left vacant by Gustafson 's retirement , considered by many to be the second most important agency job in the West , is not filled . Without a replacement at the top , INS staffers say morale has plummeted in the downtown Los Angeles office while Davidian and officials in Washington deliberate about who should be appointed . * Davidian 's office is lax in persuading aliens to complete their amnesty applications under the latest phase of the landmark immigration reform law . To achieve legal residency , applicants must complete courses on U.S. history and English by November . To date , 70 % of the 1 million applicants in the West have completed the second step , but critics say the percentage could be much higher if Davidian was personally involved . * Davidian 's views on various immigration issues , such as political asylum and increased funding for the agency , are unknown . Davidian said he chooses not to talk publicly about his views , partly because that is the job of his boss , INS Commissioner Gene McNary in Washington . * Some Latino activists involved in immigration work accuse Davidian of refusing to meet with them . He rejects that charge , saying he has met in recent months with representatives from such well-known Latino organizations as the American GI Forum and the League of United Latin American Citizens ( LULAC ) . But Arnold Torres , national political adviser for LULAC , said those contacts were unauthorized and not substantive . `` Since August , we have repeatedly sought meetings with him but he has officially closed the door after our opposition to the confirmation of McNary as INS commissioner . '' Such criticism does not seem to faze Davidian , a man of reserved demeanor who chaired the California Agriculture Labor Relations Board for 2 1/2 years as an appointee of Republican Gov . George Deukmejian before assuming the INS post Aug. 15 . Davidian said he has worked hard to forge links with some Asian , Latino and other ethnic groups , adding that he 's willing to meet with members of `` responsible groups '' when his schedule permits it . To the criticism that he has been slow in appointing a Los Angeles district director to replace Gustafson , Davidian said he takes `` full responsibility . '' `` I 'd love to fill that job , '' he said . But he said McNary , who must have a hand in the selection , is still relatively new to his post and has other items to deal with first . `` It 's such an important job that I think we 'll be very slow , very deliberative , '' Davidian said . Some of Davidian 's strongest supporters are those who work with him at the INS Laguna Niguel headquarters . They give him top marks in his first six months . `` He 's very popular with the people who work with him , '' said career INS official William King , who is in charge of the amnesty effort in the West . `` He 's very bright , very energetic . He 's playing it low-key until he learns his job properly . '' Even Ezell , whose publicity stunts and outrageous statements sometimes got him into hot water with higher-ups during his six-year tenure as INS Western regional commissioner , has kudos for Davidian . `` I 've heard nothing but good things about him from guys close in ( who work with Davidian ) , '' Ezell said . `` And they ought to know . '' Officials within the Justice Department , which oversees the INS , say Davidian 's demeanor is a marked improvement over Ezell 's flamboyant , controversial style . Ezell came under fire for threatening to cut off federal funds to cities that supported the sanctuary movement for Central American refugees and once embarrassed the agency by attending a party thrown by Ferdinand and Imelda Marcos at a time when they were under investigation by the Justice Department for allegedly stealing tens of millions of dollars from the Philippines treasury . Davidian , who favors pinstripe suits and button-down collars , would never be mistaken for Ezell , who repeatedly donned a Mexican sombrero to publicize amnesty . `` Davidian 's not running around with sombreros on , talking all kinds of stuff that was not cleared with anybody in Washington , '' said one Justice Department official , who asked not to be identified . `` He 's competent , steady and working hard . '' But there are others inside the INS Western region who accuse Davidian of being a `` wimp '' who is afraid of offending his superiors . The criticism is so stinging that they asked not to be identified . `` He 's a joke , a political hack , '' said one INS middle-manager . `` We ought to have INS professionals running the show . '' Said another mid-level official inside the agency : `` His office has copies of correspondence stacked from the floor to the ceiling waiting for his signature for several weeks because he is afraid of making a decision . He has n't filled the L.A. job yet . He manages like a puppet by only reacting when Washington tells him how and when to take action . `` Ezell was overzealous but Davidian is the invisible wimp behind his closed office door . '' Davidian said his door is always open and does not understand the criticism by those under him . `` I have to say I have an open-door policy and I ca n't meet with everybody who wants to meet with me , '' he said . `` I 've never had . . . somebody walk up to me and tell me we have a morale problem that has anything to do with what I 'm doing . '' Davidian 's reluctance to speak out publicly is tied to a restrictive policy imposed on the INS by McNary , who followed the lead of his boss , Atty . Gen. Dick Thornburgh . Last November , Thornburgh started a campaign within the Justice Department against unauthorized leaks to reporters . McNary then issued a directive requiring that all news media inquiries , unless they are of the most routine nature , be cleared with INS headquarters in Washington . It requires Washington 's approval before any INS official , including ranking ones like Davidian , can speak officially with a reporter . But in the months since the policy began , overly cautious immigration officials at every level have checked with Washington before releasing any information . Recently , when one official at the Laguna Niguel regional headquarters was asked for his title , he replied that he would have to get clearance from Washington . The official never called back . Davidian refuses to be drawn into a debate on the issue . But Ezell , who was never shy about voicing his opinions , said he opposes the new policy . `` The attorney general can be the one spokesman for the Justice Department and that 's his decision , '' Ezell said . `` But it 's a lousy one . He 's not omnipresent . You have a department with qualified appointees who are commissioners . That 's what you got them there for . The attorney general 's 3,000 miles away from the action . '' Furthermore , Ezell said , the aggressive public posture the agency took during the Reagan Administration is `` going down the tubes . '' Instead of reacting to the criticism , Davidian is content to go out and meet the troops and face the challenges of his job , even if he lacks Ezell 's showmanship . One of those challenges is the agency 's growing role in the interdiction of illegal drugs smuggled across the U.S.-Mexican border . The INS role in the drug war comes at a time when Bush Administration officials admit there are dwindling funds for an already overworked immigration service . Davidian said he was surprised when he learned how much drugs his Border Patrol agents are seizing while apprehending illegal aliens . `` One day , a coyote ( alien smuggler ) may be bringing over undocumented aliens . The next day , he or she may be bringing over marijuana . The next day , it may be cocaine and the next day , it may be undocumented aliens again , '' Davidian said . `` We did n't go looking for the war on drugs . It came to us . ''