Unless you live on the coastline , it 's hot this time of the year . So you flip on the ol ' central air-conditioning , listen for the satisfying ca-chink of the solenoid cranking up the unit and wait for the cool air of modern technology to bathe the sweat from your brow . Sounds fine , until you get the electric bill . What 's this ? It says you used as much juice as the entire city of Santa Paula did last month . It 's that air conditioner , you exclaim to anyone who will listen . You did n't purposely waste electricity . You 're the type of person who turns off lights in rooms that nobody is using , puts in long-lasting light bulbs , and turns the television off whenever you leave the room for more than a few minutes . It 's that blasted air conditioner that 's doing it . Well , yes and no . Sure , the air conditioner is putting an extra strain on the budget , but many of us who are real conservation nuts about light bulbs and stove pilot lights do n't even think about the central air conditioner . But you can stay cool and cut down the outflow of hard-earned cash by servicing your air conditioner to maximize its efficiency . Most manufacturers say the first thing to do is to have your equipment checked out . And if you have n't done so in a year or two , whatever the service charge is , it really would n't hurt to have someone come over and take a look . Now , here is where common sense comes in . If the unit is working properly and is less than 5 years old , service consultants from a number of manufacturers say , `` If it ai n't broken , do n't fix it . '' OK , but there are a number of things you can do to make sure your air conditioner works easier . The most common maintenance point is to regularly change the air filter on the indoor part of the air conditioner . The air filter keeps the machine from sucking up muck as it draws in air to cool down and blow out through the vents . As the filter gets dirty , the air conditioner has to work harder to get the air it needs to do the job . The more it works , the more juice it needs and , you get the idea , the higher your electric bill , not to mention the wear and tear on the equipment . But when the maintenance person comes , do n't point in the direction of the air conditioner and go back to watching television . Watch what he or she is doing . More important , find out exactly where that air filter is so that next time , instead of calling out the cavalry , you can do it yourself . If you 're going to do it yourself , make sure the unit is off . Now , if you remembered where the maintenance person found it , or you have the instruction book that came with the unit , look for the air filter . There 's a good chance it 's made of blue gauzy stuff in a black cardboard frame , with a thin aluminum grid of round circles on one side to hold it together . As you slide the filter halfway out , look carefully at how it fits . Found that piece of thin aluminum with the round circles ? Remember on which side it goes . It 'll be important later . Now , take it outside ( stay inside if you like , but do n't be angry when a lot of the sooty glop on the filter falls onto your floor ) and carefully look for some numbers on the outside of the black cardboard frame . Sooner or later , you 'll find something like 12 x 15 , or 20 x 25 . That translates to 12 inches by 15 inches and 20 inches by 25 inches . It can be any set of dimensions , so do n't worry if these are n't your numbers . Write down the numbers ( once you see the dozens of sizes , you 'll be glad you wrote them down ) and head off to the garden , discount or do-it-yourself store of your choice . Buy two or three or four . They 're cheap , so why run to the store every few months for another ? Store the others in a closet , but be careful , they 're easily damaged . Remembering which side had the aluminum grid , slide the new air filter back into its snug home . ( Some filters have an arrow printed on the side to indicate the direction of air flow . ) Button up the machine and fire it up . Put a piece of tape on the inside of the door with the date on which you changed the filter . Three months from now , change it again . But that 's not the only thing you can do to lengthen the life of your air conditioner and reduce electricity consumption . You can see if there are any coolant leaks . In the morning , put a thermometer by one of vents and let it get good and cold from the air blast for about five or 10 minutes . Record the temperature and do it for five days straight , preferably at the same time of the day so that the outside temperature will be as uniform as possible ) . If the temperature stays the same , it does n't necessarily mean you have enough refrigerant , but it will probably indicate that there are no leaks . If the temperature gradually rises over the period , you may have a leaky valve or cracked hose somewhere that is leaking coolant . Since some types of coolants are the enemy of the Earth 's ozone layer , by fixing leaks you are not only saving money but also protecting the atmosphere . Is your house or apartment empty all day because you 're at work , but you leave the air conditioner on anyway in order to come home to a nice , cool place ? You 're wasting electricity . Not to mention that you are wearing out the air conditioner . Many units can be connected to a thermostat with a built-in timer ( perhaps a little expensive , but it 's a one-time-only cost ) that can be set to turn on the air conditioner about an hour before you come home and turn it off about an hour after you go to bed . Caution . Unless you 're a skilled electrician , replacing a thermostat is something you should n't do yourself -- this is your house wiring you 're playing with , so let a professional do it . If you do n't have a maintenance book , get one . Somewhere on the machine is a plate that states the manufacturer and model . Call or write a letter and ask for a replacement . There may be a small charge . Inside will probably be a list of servicing points that a homeowner can regularly do by himself or herself . Familiarize yourself with the machine 's main on/off switch in case of an emergency , and go outside and clean the leaves and junk off the external parts of the air conditioner . And when you turn off the air for the last time this year , think about wrapping up that external casing in a plastic garbage bag to keep the rain and dirt out . You 'd do the same for a back-yard barbecue , would n't you ? But if all this is still too technical for you , do n't be afraid to call a maintenance person . Find out if a friend uses someone , and if he or she is satisfied , call and see if that person will service your equipment . Or look in the Yellow Pages under `` Air-Conditioning Contractors & Systems . '' When the heat is gone and it 's time to wonder if the furnace is going to work , make a note to yourself to call for servicing , or at least change the filter , just before the hot weather sets in next year . Would n't it be nice to know of any cooling problems before the heat sets in again ?