Amy Aronson loves bicycle riding , so when the 8-year-old Laguna Hills girl won a mountain bike in a school coloring contest she was ecstatic . But since its January delivery , the bike has sat unused as Amy has grown ever weaker from the debilitating effects of cystic fibrosis , a genetic disease that causes respiratory infections and gradually weakens the entire body . She is now hospitalized , awaiting a heart-lung transplant that may mean new life . Her parents , Linda and Richard Aronson , have maintained a bedside vigil at Children 's Hospital of Orange County , hoping to receive word that the operation can proceed . But donor organs are scarce . Even though Amy tops the waiting list for her size , in the eight days since she was placed on two organ procurement lists that cover Southern California there has been no word of a prospective donor . For the Aronsons , it is an agonizing time because they know that 20 % to 30 % of all transplant candidates die before a suitable organ can be found . They are hoping that anyone who knows or suspects that matching organs may become available -- such as from the victims of traffic accidents -- will call local transplant registries . But their plea is not only for their daughter . It 's crucial that people are reminded of `` how important it is to consider donating their organs , '' said Richard Aronson , a Superior Court commissioner . Amy 's condition was diagnosed when she was 2 , her father said . Although there is no cure for the disease , victims can be treated with antibiotics . Though many children are able to lead normal and long lives with treatment , Amy 's case is much more severe than most . She used to run and play like any girl , said Richard Aronson . She would get dizzy and have terrible headaches , but that did not stop her from chasing her younger brother , Richie , now 6 , around the house . She took ballet lessons . Bright and outgoing , she is an `` A '' student . `` But gradually those things fell by the wayside , '' her father said . Eventually , the antibiotics failed to stem the secretion of mucus that choked her lungs . Since the beginning of the year , `` she has had to wear oxygen masks more often , she could n't walk , then she needed a wheelchair , '' he said . She now weighs about 40 pounds , said Dr. Ralph Rucker , director of pediatric pulmonary services at Children 's Hospital . Without a transplant , which she would undergo at UC San Diego , she may have only one or two weeks to live . `` She 's in very critical condition . She has major difficulty in breathing , '' Rucker said . `` It 's not 'maybe ' or 'perhaps . ' She will not survive without a transplant . '' There have been fewer than 100 combined heart-lung transplants performed in the United States , said Dr. Stuart Jamieson , a leading transplant surgeon and chief of cardio-thoracic surgery at UCSD . About a half-dozen people who need combined transplants are on the UCSD waiting list , including Amy , Jamieson said . The UCSD program has about an 80 % survival rate after one year for the combined operation . The problem remains one of finding donor organs . Under California law , hospitals are required to approach the families of potential organ donors , but the need still far outstrips the supply , Rucker said . Rucker and Aronson want to remind people that much good can often be retrieved from tragedy . `` If I had a chance to donate my children 's organs to someone , it would seem a way for them to live on , '' Aronson said . `` If I could contribute to helping someone else live , it would be special to me . '' Anyone who wants more information or knows of prospective donor organs may call the California Heart Transplant Center in San Diego at ( 619 ) CA-HEART or the Organ and Tissue Acquisition Center , also in San Diego at ( 619 ) 294-6263 .