The city of New York , seeking to make paint manufacturers pay all costs of removing lead paint from city-owned buildings , Thursday charged in a civil suit that five leading makers and their trade association deliberately covered up damaging medical evidence about lead poisoning . New York 's lawyers said it was the first such case in the country and was expected to spark similar lawsuits . The city asks for recovery of more than $ 50 million various city agencies have spent over the years in efforts to reduce the risks posed by lead paint , particularly to children . The city is demanding reimbursement for inspecting , testing , paint removal , treating lead poisoning victims and other costs . More than 6,500 incidents of lead poisoning in children have been reported in New York from 1983 to 1988 . Lead poisoning can cause learning disabilities , mental retardation , behavioral disorders , permanent brain damage and even death . The greatest danger to youngsters comes from eating peeling or flaking lead paint chips . `` At least as early as the mid-19th Century , the hazards of lead paint , including the hazards of lead paint to children , were well known to the medical and scientific communities , as well as to lead producers and painters , '' the suit charged. '' . . . Notwithstanding defendants ' extensive knowledge of the hazards of lead paint , particularly the hazards to children , and defendants ' opposition to the use of lead paint on toys and children 's furniture , defendants continued from the 1920s until at least the mid-1950s to advertise and/or promote lead paint as appropriate for uses which might foreseeably result in the exposure of young children to lead through inhalation , ingestion or absorption . '' Use of Lead Paint Banned Since 1960 , New York has prohibited the use of lead paint in homes and apartment buildings . `` For many years , these defendants or their predecessors hid the dangers of lead paint , '' charged Peter L. Zimroth , New York 's corporation counsel . `` They have caused great pain to thousands of victims . '' Mayor Edward I. Koch said , `` If we have the right to demand that Exxon pay the price for cleaning up the environmental disaster it caused in Prince William Sound , we also have the right to demand that the lead pigment industry clean up the environmental catastrophe they have caused in buildings throughout our city and other urban areas . '' Named as defendants in the suit filed in New York state Supreme Court were NL Industries , Inc. of New Jersey , Eagle-Picher Industries Inc. of Ohio , Atlantic Richfield Co. of Delaware , Sherwin-Williams Co. of Ohio and the Glidden Co. of Delaware and its successor SCM Corp. Also named was the Lead Industries Assn. , the industry 's New York-based trade association . Efforts to reach the trade association late Thursday for comment were unsuccessful . The city is being assisted in its suit by Trial Lawyers for Public Justice , a Washington-based public interest law firm , and Thornton & Early , a Boston law firm . Trial Lawyers for Public Justice and the Boston firm have filed lawsuits against the same defendants on behalf of children who allegedly suffered lead poisoning .