Edison High School 's hopes for its first Southern Section 4-A boys ' volleyball title went down quietly Saturday night . Mira Costa ended Edison 's 13-match winning streak with a 15-6 , 15-12 , 15-11 victory at Marina High School . The championship was Mira Costa 's second in the past seven years . Mira Costa ( 18-0 ) has handed Edison ( 17-2 ) its only defeats this season . The Mustangs won a five-game , three-hour match at Edison in March . But Edison did little Saturday night against the Mustangs , winners of 39 of their last 40 matches over the past two seasons and ranked No . 1 nationally by Volleyball Monthly . `` They did n't take us out of our game but they played extremely well , '' Edison Coach Brian Rofer said . `` They put up a big block . '' Mira Costa Coach Mike Cook said the key to the Mustangs ' easy victory was their blocking . The Mustangs had 27 blocks , including eight by Pat Ivie and seven by David Swatik . `` The difference was we blocked tonight , '' Cook said . `` We did n't have half as many blocks the first time we played Edison , and that one went five games instead of three . '' Swatik and Ivie also had seven kills each for Mira Costa . Steve Snyder had 11 kills and Karl Van Reusen and Daryl Ayers had seven each for Edison . Cook said the victory solidified his team 's claim as the best high school volleyball team in history . `` But that 's just for one year , '' he said . `` This is n't a dynasty . Laguna Beach won all those titles ( five in the late 1970s and early '80s ) but they did n't have a team like this . '' Rofer was n't about to argue . `` I would have to say they 're the best high school team ever , '' he said . `` We have nothing to be ashamed of . Mira Costa just worked hard and played well . '' Edison , playing in its second final in the last five years , fell behind 5-0 and 11-3 in the first game . Edison opened the second game with a 5-0 run , but Mira Costa rallied with an 11-1 streak on four kills by Mark Shoptaw and three each by Ivie and Mike Ashenfelter . Edison came back to trim the deficit to 13-12 , only to have Mira Costa win the game on consecutive hitting errors by Steve Snyder and Jason Curry . The Chargers fell behind again early in the third game . Mira Costa raced to a 6-1 lead , but Edison , sparked by three kills and a block by Snyder , fought back to tie it at 9-9 . Mira Costa pushed ahead , 11-9 , on a kill by Ashenfelter and an ace by Ivie , but Edison again rallied to tie it , 11-11 . A kill by Swatik , a hitting error by Edison 's Joe McCarthy and an ace by Ashenfelter gave Mira Costa a 14-11 lead . Brian Thurston 's ace gave the Mustangs the game , match and championship .