QUESTION : I must replace my old central air conditioner soon . I want one that is super-high-efficiency , reliable and quiet . What types of units are available to meet my needs ? ANSWER : There have been many recent significant improvements in residential-sized central air conditioners . Some of the new super-high-efficiency central units have efficiencies ( called SEER ) as high as 17 . Installing one of these can cut your cooling bills by more than 50 % . The most energy-efficient central air conditioner uses a totally variable speed compressor and fan . This allows the unit to operate at maximum efficiency for varying cooling needs and weather conditions . On very hot days , it operates at a higher speed than on cooler days . An electronic microprocessor determines the most efficient operating speed . Since it does n't cycle on and off as often , the more steady-state operation improves the efficiency and your comfort . The cooling output and air circulation are more constant throughout your home . It also operates more quietly at the lower speeds . Central air conditioners with two-speed compressors are also available with SEERs up to 15 . ( Your old single-speed air conditioner probably has a SEER of only 6 to 7 ) . Another unit has a single-speed compressor , but a two-speed condenser fan to boost efficiency to more than 12 . The scroll compressor design is now used in many of the super-high-efficiency air conditioners . Its advantages are its quiet operation , high efficiency and simplicity . The noise levels from a scroll compressor can be 10 % to 20 % lower than from a standard reciprocating compressor . With only a few moving parts , a scroll compressor is less prone to mechanical and lubrication breakdown . This makes it very reliable , and it actually becomes more efficient the older it gets as it wears in . When you select a central air conditioner , it is important to have it properly sized . Your contractor should do a detailed heat gain analysis of your house and economic pay-back analysis for units of various efficiencies . An oversized unit not only operates inefficiently by cycling on and off too often , but it decreases the comfort level . In all but the very hottest weather , it wo n't run long enough to adequately dehumidify the air . This is where the variable- and multiple-compressors help . You can write for Utility Bills Update No . 394 showing a buyer 's guide for 21 manufacturers of super-high-efficiency central air conditioners , listing models , cooling capacities , rated efficiencies , sound levels , types of compressors and numbers of speeds . Please include $ 1.25 and a business-size return envelope . Send your requests to James Dulley , c/o Los Angeles Times , 6906 Royalgreen Drive , Cincinnati , Ohio 45244 . Should Damper in Fireplace Be Closed ? Q : I have a wood-burning fireplace with a brick chimney on the west side of the house . When I air condition in the summer , should I close the chimney damper or leave it open for natural ventilation ? A : If you are operating a central air conditioner , you should keep the chimney damper closed . The brick chimney holds the sun 's heat well into the evening . This creates an upward draft and draws out cooled air . If you do n't air condition , leave the chimney damper open . The natural draft from the warm chimney draws cool outdoor air in the windows at night . It is actually a form of free solar energy replacing an electric fan .