Two airlines are running newspaper ads claiming that each will have the only nonstop flights between Hong Kong and Los Angeles . Which is telling the truth ? In a sense , both . Any confusion is the result of a deal between American Airlines and Hong Kong-based Cathay Pacific Airways . The planes flying the route , which will be inaugurated July 1 , will be those of Cathay Pacific . But Cathay Pacific has sold 38 % of the seats to American . American is selling the seats as if they were on its own planes . Both airlines say every effort is made to tell passengers that they will actually be flying Cathay Pacific . The American ads also say so , in relatively small type . Such block seat-sale arrangements , as they are called , can be good business for both carriers . `` Cathay Pacific is a profit-oriented airline , '' a spokeswoman said . `` This partnership helps assure that the route will be more financially secure and successful . '' American , which has no routes to Hong Kong , gets a presence there nevertheless . It also gets a chance to attract Cathay Pacific passengers to its U.S. routes . `` It gives us a marketing opportunity , '' a spokesman for Dallas-based American said . American , he added , hopes one day to fly between Hong Kong and Los Angeles . But getting foreign routes requires bilateral negotiations between the countries involved , as well as approval by the U.S. government . `` We certainly would like to expand into the Pacific Rim as much as possible , '' the spokesman said . But the airline is putting its major emphasis on acquiring additional routes to Japan . American 's only Japan route is between Dallas and Tokyo . Agreements such as the one between American and Cathay Pacific are not unusual . Airlines have purchased blocks of seats on other airlines before . It is often done -- as Cathay Pacific is doing -- when an airline is trying to develop a new market . Cathay Pacific started in 1946 with $ 30,000 in capital and one route -- between Shanghai and Sydney , Australia -- using a refurbished military transport plane . It is now considered a highly efficient airline . It flies throughout Asia and to major cities in Europe and North America .