Carefully , deliberately and by the book , the crewmen maneuvered the U.S. Navy submarine up from the depths of the Mediterranean Sea . They listened to the sonar for telltale noises . Nothing . The order was given to climb . As the periscope poked above the surface , the looming image of a 100,000-ton tanker came into focus , dead ahead . `` He was so big that even head-on , bow-on . . . we could n't hear his screws ( propellers ) through his hull , so we did n't know he was there , '' recalled retired Vice Admiral Patrick J. Hannifin . `` We came up and went down in a hurry . '' Hannifin 's submarine escaped harm 's way during the near-collision , which occurred more than a decade ago in the Mediterranean Sea . Two weeks ago , off the coast of Los Angeles , the crew of the submarine Houston was not so fortunate . The crew of the tugboat Barcona was less fortunate still . The nuclear-powered Houston , on standby for filming of the motion picture `` The Hunt for Red October , '' a fictional saga of a Soviet submarine skipper 's defection to the United States , snagged the Barcona 's steel tow cable and yanked the tugboat backward and under in less than a minute . One crew member drowned and two others survived . A Navy spokeswoman at the Houston 's home port in San Diego called the incident `` freakish , '' but the submarine only two days later , operating in roughly the same waters , sliced through a trawler 's fishing net . The Navy says both incidents are under investigation . Navy officials have left many questions unanswered in the two recent accidents off the Southern California coast involving the Houston , a fast-attack submarine . But evidence has emerged that at least one of the incidents occurred while the Houston was in a blind spot similar to the one described by submarine experts interviewed last week . Strange as it may seem to civilians , submarine experts say that highly sophisticated Navy submarines sometimes travel through the oceans of the world nearly blind to what is around them . In fact , during some maneuvers the submarine captain operates with a blind spot not unlike a driver changing lanes on a freeway . Under Navy policy , submarines rarely use the sensitive `` active '' sonar systems on board because in order to do so they must emit signals that could reveal their location . Instead , they rely on `` passive sonar , '' which means carefully listening for the sound of engines , clanking chains or any other auditory clues . No Noise , No Detection But if a vessel is not making any noise , there is little chance that the submariners will detect it . `` It 's quite extraordinary , '' said Angus Peetz , a research aide to George Foulkes , a member of the British Parliament who has pressed for a full-scale investigation of similar sub incidents off the British Isles . `` They can hit targets 2,000 miles away , but they ca n't spot a fishing boat above them . '' While the issue of sub collisions is something relatively new to California mariners , it has been a growing controversy in Britain and Ireland . Members of both the British and Irish parliaments are demanding to know what role submarines may have played in the `` mysterious '' disappearances , sinkings and snaggings of several dozen fishing boats in the Irish Sea , resulting in the loss of more than 100 lives since 1980 . Officials with the U.S. and British navies have said that their submarines have not been involved in fatal incidents in the area . However , officials in both navies have confirmed details of collisions and several snaggings involving submarines and civilian vessels . The collisions , naval experts say , illustrate a point that remains true today : Surfacing from the deep is a maneuver that challenges even the most experienced skippers with the highest-tech gadgets on board . Most Vulnerable Time '' It 's that time when the submarine is most vulnerable , '' said Hannifin , who was commander of all U.S. and NATO submarines in the Mediterranean from 1971 to 1973 , then went on to become the director of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . `` He 's really blind . The problem is that a submarine completely submerged ca n't see anything . `` It can hear , but it ca n't see . It can hear a fishing boat , for example , if the fishing boat is running its engines . What it ca n't hear are fishing nets or barges being towed , because barges do n't make any noise . '' In order to minimize the chances of running into another vessel , submarines generally travel well below the surface . When it is time to ascend , they move swiftly to periscope depth . `` There is a period , truly , of uncertainty as you go through this transition from the deep submerged state to a shallow submerged state , and so you very carefully search around , '' said Capt . Thomas C. Maloney , retired commanding officer of a nuclear-powered submarine of the same class as the Houston . `` You maneuver the ship to see if there 's some target behind you , '' Maloney said , `` and then you very quickly try to bring the ship up so you can look out through the periscope . '' Maloney described the transition period as a tension-filled time and compared it to an automobile on a freeway . `` Once in a while , you get ready to change lanes and all of a sudden you find there 's somebody in your blind spot , '' Maloney said , `` even though you thought you 've done a pretty careful search . '' Masked Sounds Such events occur rarely , Maloney said , and explanations vary . Sometimes another loud ship in the distance masks the sound of the closer ship , he said . Or sometimes it 's simply a sailboat that was making no detectable noise . Still , active sonar , which is capable of detecting silent objects , is rarely used . Using passive sonar , a submarine crew member simply listens for noises , but with active sonar , the operator can send out sound waves that will bounce back to the submarine with a `` ping '' if it strikes an object . The active system works best in detecting totally submerged objects , Maloney said , but is less reliable when aimed at the surface . Depth , water conditions , surface waves and other variables all can generate sonar `` clutter '' that cuts down on reliability , he said . The overriding reason that active sonar is rarely used , however , is security . `` When you use active sonar , you give your position away , '' said James Bush , a retired Navy captain and former submarine commander who now works with the Washington-based Center for Defense Information . Active sonar is generally reserved for `` battle situations , '' Bush said . `` You 're going to shoot a torpedo at him anyway , so why not make sure you know exactly where he is . '' In any case , Bush and others said , it is highly unlikely that any sonar system would detect a fishing net . Navy officials confirm that fishermen from around the world have been reimbursed for nets and catches lost when submarines accidentally sliced through them , but precise figures were not made available last week . Bernard Moffat , general secretary of the Celtic League , an organization that fosters cooperation among the Celtic areas of the British Isles , has been monitoring military activity in the narrow , relatively shallow and heavily fished strip of sea between Ireland and mainland Britain known to submarine crew members as `` Rat 's Run . '' 100 Civilian Deaths Since 1980 , he said , there have been 21 disappearances of civilian vessels and more than 100 civilian deaths . The incidents have occurred in calm-to-moderate sea conditions , and Moffat claims that at least some of them probably are linked to submarines . In 1982 , the British Navy paid damages after the submarine HMS Porpoise sank a fishing boat . All crew members were rescued . But U.S. submarine involvement in other accidents is less certain . Moffat acknowledges that `` we ca n't say they 're definitely linked to submarines , '' but he insists that `` in almost all cases , the incidents occurred in what are listed on admiralty charts as designated submarine exercise areas . '' U.S. Navy officials confirm only a handful of close encounters in the Irish Sea . In April , a British trawler named Laurel was apparently snagged by an American sub off the Isle of Man . The U.S. Navy released a report saying only that the crew had no indication of the snagging , but minor paint scrapes found on the sub `` were assumed to be the result of the snagging . '' An investigation is continuing , the Navy said . Three months earlier , U.S. officials say , a surface collision occurred between a U.S. submarine and the fishing vessel New Dawn . Authorities are awaiting a resolution with the insurance company representing the boat owner . Net-snagging incidents in 1987 prompted the U.S. Navy to pay out more than 28,000 British pounds in damages to the owners of the British fishing vessels Heroine and Summer Morn .