The three-day streak of record-high temperatures that brought sweltering days to San Diego County this week ended Saturday , but unseasonal April warmth continued to send waves of people to the beaches . A fourth , consecutive record temperature was missed Saturday when the mercury stopped climbing at 80 degrees -- 2 degrees shy of the record temperature for April 8 , according to Harvey Hastrup , a forecaster with the National Weather Service . The record of 82 degrees was set in 1885 . After four straight 90-degree-plus days , Saturday 's slight temperature drop was a welcome relief , even though temperatures remained far above normal for April . `` We 've been above the average every day so far , '' Hastrup said . Average April temperatures range from a high of 68 degrees to a low of 54 degrees . The drop in temperatures that began Saturday is expected to continue for the next several days , with temperatures returning to seasonal standards by Tuesday or Wednesday , Hastrup added . The current heat wave began Tuesday , when a high pressure system developed off the coast , pushing a blast of warm air into the Southland and blocking cooler sea breezes . As that pressure system moves eastward , temperatures should drop , Hastrup said . But until then , throngs of people are likely to continue heading to the beaches . More than 7,000 people stretched out in the sand at south Pacific Beach , according to lifeguard Matt Rowland . `` That 's like a fairly typical holiday crowd , '' Rowland said . `` With the Santa Ana breaking down , it 's been a little bit milder . We 've even had some pretty thick clouds out here . '' The cooling trend should be more noticeable today , with temperatures expected to range between a comfortable 70 and 75 degrees at the beaches , forecasters said . Along the coast , temperatures today may reach the 80s , with lows expected between 58 and 63 . In the inland areas , the mercury is expected to climb into the 90s , with nighttime lows between 50 and 58 degrees . In the desert , however , temperatures could soar as high as 110 degrees , with lows between 64 and 72 .