In the latest of a string of strategic alliances between young biotechnology firms and established drug manufacturers , Gensia Pharmaceuticals of San Diego has agreed to sell 15.9 % of its stock for $ 15 million to Marion Merrell Dow Inc . The deal gives Marion Merrell Dow the right to exclusively license , manufacture and market certain oral drugs Gensia is developing that use a new class of compounds called purine/pyrimidines to treat cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases . The drugs may benefit heart attack and heart disease victims . Based in Kansas City , Marion Merrell Dow was formed last year when Dow Chemical 's Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals subsidiary merged with Marion Laboratories to form a $ 2-billion-plus drug manufacturing and marketing company . One of the company 's drugs , a calcium channel blocker called Cardizem , is a leading treatment for angina and hypertension . Closely held Gensia was founded in 1986 by two University of California , San Diego , scientists and has since raised $ 26.2 million in venture capital to further its research and development of compounds associated with purine/pyrimidine metabolism , President David Hale said Wednesday . The compounds seem to be effective in minimizing the tissue damage called ischemia , which results from the lack of oxygen caused by heart attacks . If successful , the drugs could be administered to acute heart attack victims as well as to chronic sufferers of heart disease , Hale said . Gensia 's first product , a purine compound called ARA-100 , is in advanced stages of clinical trials in the United Kingdom and may reach the market by 1994 , Hale said . The potential market for the drug is at least $ 100 million for acute applications and $ 200 million for chronic patients , Hale said . Richard Stover , a principal with Alex . Brown & Sons investment bankers in New York , said the Marion Merrell Dow-Gensia agreement is `` characteristic of Marion 's strategy where they find interesting technology and sources of products for some of their therapeutic areas , particularly cardiovascular and ischemic heart disease . '' Hale , who was president of Hybritech when the San Diego-based monoclonal antibody company was acquired by Eli Lilly for $ 485 million in 1986 , said in a statement that the `` physician office-based market '' for the oral drugs Gensia is developing is `` best served by a major pharmaceutical company such as MMD , which has the marketing capability and financial resources to address these large markets . ''