No living thing is too big , too small , too slimy , too ugly , or too smelly . If it flies , crawls , slithers , hops , swims , or walks on four legs and is in need of help , Bob Farner will be there . Bob Farner 's Wildlife Rescue and Education Center , newly located on 3 acres in Valley Center , was established in 1980 primarily for the rehabilitation of injured and orphaned animals . Another , equally important goal of the organization is educating the public about wildlife preservation . `` We 've become so far removed from nature that we 've come to fear it , '' Farner says . He wants people to realize that animals and birds will stand a much better chance of survival when people learn to adapt and share the environment with them . `` I think people who love and understand wildlife get along in life very , very well , '' Farner said , espousing his theory that this kind of sensitivity and wisdom fosters a sense of fulfillment that enriches everyday lives . In an effort to introduce people to wildlife and individual animals , Farner takes wild animals into classrooms , hospital rooms and town halls . A tour of his center 's facility brings you face to face with a cougar named Sheba , a blind great blue heron known as Blue , and Flag , a mule deer , all permanent residents with no hope of returning to the wild . As a young cub , Sheba was declawed by an exotic-animal dealer in Texas who sold her to a customer as a pet . Kept illegally , she was removed from that home at the age of 7 months and placed with Farner , who has cared for her over the last seven years . Blue lost both eyes when the Carlsbad lagoon in which he lived grew polluted with toxins . Now he must be carefully hand-fed , a process he and Farner have perfected through trial and error . Flag was rescued from someone who raised him and kept him confined to a small apartment . This robbed him of his wild instincts and rendered him incapable of survival outside of a captive environment . Many of the animals are victims of Mother Nature herself . People bring in baby birds who have fallen from nests , orphaned animals whose mothers have either abandoned them or been killed , and many sick animals . Weather patterns , too , such as persistent drought , can wreak havoc on wild habitats . The hapless victims of human ignorance are the ones that bother Farner the most . `` It preys on my mind , but I just have to forget it , '' he said . Incidents like these only serve to deepen his resolve to continue showing and telling . He cautions people to use judgment when they come across an animal in need of help . To avoid hurting either themselves or the animal , Farner or an experienced volunteer will come out to remove a sick or injured critter , or relocate a healthy one that may pose a threat , such as a rattlesnake . Farner has his finger on the pulse of the diverse San Diego County wildlife populations . Encroaching development has reduced the habitats of many animals , including the once plentiful deer whose reproduction is naturally regulated by the availability of habitat . Certain barometers have already indicated seriously declining populations . For instance , this year the center has taken in 15 barn owls . This is down from 37 at this time last year and from the 100-plus the year before . No red-tailed or red-shouldered hawks have come in so far this year ; they used to get as many as a dozen . A nonprofit organization , the wildlife center has no paid employees and relies entirely on private donations . Volunteers contribute their time , knowledge and whatever else is needed -- including food and medical care -- for the animals . Wildlife Rescue & Education Center Valley Center Call : 749-6737 or 724-6338 . Keep calling ; workers are often busy outside with the animals . Or write : Bob Farner 1286 Oak Knoll Drive Vista , Calif. 92084 Notes : Visitors are welcome ; so are new volunteers .