QUESTION : I spend a lot each year for the chemicals to treat my swimming pool . Will those new ( no chemicals ) ionization pool purification systems really work and do they use much electricity ? ANSWER : An ionization pool water purification system can reduce the amount of chlorine and other chemicals you need by more than 90 % . It uses only several dollars worth of electricity per swimming season . Using minerals , silver and copper , to purify water is an ancient process . Even in extremely low concentrations , silver kills bacteria . Copper , in the same low concentrations , stops the growth of algae . The concentrations are lower than in many types of natural mineral drinking water . An ionization water purifier uses two electrodes that are made primarily of copper and silver . When a low-voltage electrical current is passed between the electrodes , copper and silver ions are given off into the swimming pool water . There is n't any danger from this very low voltage . You can easily install a purification unit yourself . The special electrodes are housed in a small bowl-shaped tank with inlet and outlet pipe flanges . These attach to the piping outside your pool . You will still need the filtering system to remove dirt . You can wire it so that the purifier comes on when the pump starts . The purification system has an electronic control unit that adjusts the concentration level of the copper and silver ions in the pool water . You use a simple test kit , included with the system , to check the concentration level until you find the proper adjustment for your pool . When you first install the ionization system , you still have to use some chlorine and chemicals until the ion concentrations get to an adequate level . Then , a couple of times each swimming season , you should add some standard chemicals for a quick treatment of the pool water . Other than couple of cents per day for the electricity to operate the unit , your only expense is the replacement of the electrodes about every three to five years . They come in a set with new gaskets and you can replace them yourself . You can write to me for Utility Bills Update No . 261 showing a product description sheet , operating and water testing instructions , and a list of manufacturers of ionization pool purification systems . Please include $ 1 and a self-addressed envelope . Send your requests to James Dulley , c/o Los Angeles Times , 6906 Royalgreen Drive , Cincinnati , Ohio 45244 . Can Air Conditioner Operate With Timer ? Q : I put my window air conditioner in again . I know it saves electricity to turn it off when I leave . Can I plug my air conditioner into the timer that I use for my lights and have it come on before I get home ? A : Your idea of using a timer to control your air conditioner is good . It is similar to using an automatic setback furnace thermostat during the winter and it would cut your air-conditioning costs . However , you should n't try to use a standard lighting-type of timer for an air conditioner . The electricity drawn by an air conditioner , even a small window unit , is substantially more than for lights . A timer for lights is usually not designed to handle that much electric current . You will need to purchase a timer that is rated at least for a 15-amp current load . Several companies make heavy-duty electrical timers for air conditioner use . Check at a hardware , home center or electrical dealer .