Oliver Rose knows how to retaliate . After his wife nearly kills him in the marital-discord film , `` The War of the Roses , '' he saws off the heels of her many splendid shoes . On screen , wife Barbara Rose 's vast collection , enshrined museum-like behind wall-to-wall glass doors , may look far-fetched . But the next time you exchange small talk with a well-heeled female , ask how many pairs of shoes she owns . The answer could knock your socks off . In New York and Los Angeles alone , there are women with collections ranging from 70 to 700 pairs . Right up there with them is Mary Trasko , ) author of the coffee-table tome , `` Heavenly Soles , '' ( published last fall by Abbeville Press ) , who keeps an adored Roger Vivier pump , given to her by the designer , in the china cabinet of her New York apartment . What leads seemingly rational ( and not always rich ) women to such extremes ? By their own and expert accounts , they think of beautifully made shoes as art . Wearable sculpture . Poetry in motion . On a more down-to-earth level , they revel in the exquisite materials , the craftsmanship and the comfort they say can only be found in expensive footwear . Added to that is the ease . `` Buying a pair of shoes is not like buying a pair of pants , '' notes one retailer . `` There 's far less ego involved . A woman does n't have to get undressed . '' Trasko calls members of the haute shoe-buying clique `` shoe collectors or shoe enthusiasts . I would n't say fetishists , because that 's more of a sexual thing . '' Yet every enthusiast can name a designer who sends her into ecstasy . For Trasko , it 's Vivier , the Frenchman who purportedly created the stiletto heel and made a silver pump with a `` ball of diamonds '' heel ( out of rhinestones ) for Marlene Dietrich . The savvy also rave about French-born Maud Frizon , known for her fanciful , flirtatious pumps ; London-based Manolo Blahnik , a specialist in sexy evening mules ; Italian Andrea Pfister , designer of the 1979 `` bird cage '' shoe that spawned millions of plastic imitations , known as `` jellies '' ; Robert Clergerie and Stephane Kelian , French designers dedicated to simple , stylish footwear . They also treasure Parisian Philippe Model , whose capricious flair influences both his hats and shoes ; fellow Parisian Christian Louboutin , who works in unusual materials , such as palm bark and fish skins ; Walter Steiger , son of a Swiss shoemaker , who creates classic , architectural footwear in Italy ; New-York-based Susan Bennis and Warren Edwards , designers of flights of fancy that are on display in New York 's Metropolitan Museum of Art . Prices for fine footwear can range from about $ 200 to more than $ 1,000 , although some lucky collectors have found vintage shoes in thrift shops for as little as $ 15 . Michael Leeson , screenwriter and co-producer , says the idea of destroying shoes in `` The War of the Roses '' occurred to him during an argument with his wife . They were walking to their car , exchanging verbal blows , when she stopped mid-sentence to stare at a window filled with Walter Steiger footwear . Leeson demanded to know how shoes could be more important than the tiff at hand . His wife 's only response was , `` 'Shh , ' `` he recalls . `` I was standing behind her and I thought of sawing the heels off her shoes . If I were going to do something really hurtful , it would be through her shoes , because women do have this unnatural attachment to their shoes . They are almost mystical in their importance . '' `` I hate to say it , but if it 's between the rent and a great pair of shoes , shoes win out . That 's what some customers tell me , '' confides Teri Ragsdale , manager of the Maud Frizon boutique on Rodeo Drive . A more affluent customer -- hooked on Frizon 's handmade lasts ( the inner structure of each shoe ) and whimsical details -- once left with 12 pairs of the $ 300-and-up footwear . And a novice made off like a bandit the day her Frizon-loving mother let her sample the children 's collection . `` This little girl could barely talk . So when her mother asked her which shoe she wanted , the lavender or the black , she picked up one of each , '' recalls Ragsdale . The Beverly Hills moppet got a pair of each , at $ 250 a throw . Madeleine Gallay , owner of the Sunset Plaza boutique with the same name , says her grown-up customers wear Manolo Blahnik 's mules ( $ 330- $ 600 ) `` with anything from blue jeans to ball gowns . Shoes and accessories are the most important things these women own . All a dress has to do is look good . But they have to love the shoes and accessories . I agree with them . These are the things that express who you are . '' At Ecru on Melrose Avenue , manager Elizabeth Kellin expresses appreciation for one customer , an artist , who is seriously considering decorating her living room with all the Robert Clergerie shoes she owns . In Kellin 's own closet are `` 100 pairs of shoes , if not more . '' Depending upon past associations , some are her `` happy shoes , '' others are `` sexy shoes , '' still others are `` power shoes , '' including one pair of low-heeled Clergerie oxfords that always bring her the job she wants . She professes to `` love shoes more than jewelry , and I take exceptionally good care of them . '' She has them waterproofed , gets toe guards put on the tips of the soles and keeps her shoes in boxes inside cloth travel pouches `` so they do n't hit against each other . '' If they need a light cleaning and brushing , she does that . If more is required , she takes them to a place where she has seen miracles worked : the Shoe Doctor on West 3rd Street in Los Angeles . Tips from other footwear fanatics include : Stuff shoes with tissue or shoe trees . Keep them in original boxes ( worth more to future collectors that way ) . Avoid the rain . Waterproof soles with mink oil or polish . Ride , do n't walk , in very delicate shoes . One Los Angeles woman , who insists on anonymity , says she and her husband recently moved into a beautiful new home : `` But the joke is , all I really wanted was a closet for my shoes . It would have been a lot less expensive . '' Now she keeps 70 pairs on specially designed shelves behind Plexiglas . Among her favorites are black suede Maud Frizon flats trimmed with silver bells , which she wears only in December `` and never to the theater '' ( the noise , you know ) . She was so excited when she bought them in New York a few years ago , she telephoned her husband in Los Angeles with the news . Author Trasko can easily explain such behavior : `` Shoes are more seductively sculptural than any other element of fashion . '' After she began collecting Viviers several years ago , Trasko gradually threw out all her other footwear ( except some plastic rain boots ) and became a different person : `` I 'm happy to say , it has changed my life just to wake up in the morning and put on a perfectly designed pair of shoes . '' `` Because they complete the picture , shoes do present the possibility of perfection , '' concurs Stella Resnick , a Los Angeles psychologist and footwear collector . They also `` confer power . Heels make you taller . Then there 's all the emotional symbolism ( such as ) stomping your feet . Language really attaches a lot of powerful emotions to our feet . Shoes protect them and make them less vulnerable . '' When Oliver Rose saws off those heels , `` it 's obviously a violent gesture . He paid for those shoes ; he was taking them back in a sense , '' observes Resnick . Several scenes later , Barbara Rose gets revenge by destroying her husband 's beloved Staffordshire china . But for shoe enthusiast Elizabeth Kellin that is n't good enough : `` I would have blown him up . '' BACKGROUND Cynthia Emmel , director of communications for the National Shoe Retailers Assn. , says the average woman in the United States owns 15 to 20 pairs of shoes and spends $ 50 for a pair of quality pumps .