World leaders sent Japan messages of condolences and some declared states of mourning after Emperor Hirohito 's death Saturday , but painful memories of World War II still generated criticism of the Japanese monarch . President Reagan said in a message of condolence to the Japanese people that Hirohito 's 62-year reign `` spanned one of the most tumultuous , and yet at the same time constructive eras , in the history of mankind . `` It was also an era of unprecedented reconciliation . His Majesty played a truly heroic role in bringing hostilities between our two peoples to an end , '' Reagan said , referring to Hirohito 's decision to end World War II . Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev sent his `` sincere condolences '' and `` profound sympathy '' to the Japanese people . His two-sentence telegram made no mention of wartime hostilities with what still is known officially as `` militarist Japan . '' The Kremlin currently is striving for better ties and increased trade with Japan . India declared a three-day national state of mourning in honor of Hirohito , and Norway 's King Olav V announced a three-week court mourning . President Francois Mitterrand of France opened an international conference on chemical weapons with a minute of silence . But some reaction to Hirohito 's death was cool in South Korea , which endured years of harsh colonial rule by Japan . While South Korean President Roh Tae Woo sent his condolences , a government party statement added , `` We reserve further comment , considering the unhappy past and the current Korea-Japan relationship . '' Condolences From China China extended condolences , and Taiwan said it will send a delegation to the funeral . But Taiwan 's daily United Evening News said : '' It was an irony that while Hirohito apologized to the United States and Europe for the war , he did not direct a single word to China to show his sorrow . '' Most historians believe Hirohito was a powerless figurehead but had approved orders that led to the attack on Pearl Harbor and put most of East Asia under an often brutal Japanese rule . Hirohito called on his nation to surrender in 1945 . The emperor 's death drew mixed reaction in the Netherlands , which lost more than 20,000 people under Japan 's wartime occupation of the former Dutch East Indies . The government said it sent its sympathy for `` the loss that has befallen the Japanese people , '' without mentioning the name of Hirohito , branded a war criminal by survivors of the wartime occupation of the colony that became Indonesia in 1949 . `` To many war victims , only now has World War II finally come to an end , '' said Gen. Ruud Boekholt , chairman of the Aug. 15 Commemoration Foundation , a group representing 127,000 Dutch citizens who underwent Japanese internment . `` Daily , they still feel the pain of the wartime suffering that was inflicted on them in the name of Emperor Hirohito , '' Boekholt said . But Indonesian President Suharto cabled his condolences to Crown Prince Akihito , Hirohito 's eldest son who immediately ascended the Chrysanthemum Throne , and said he will personally pay last respects to Hirohito , presidential spokesman Moerdiono said . Pope John Paul II expressed his condolences and sent telegrams to Hirohito 's family , the Vatican said .