Is Secretary of State James A. Baker III being overruled -- or censored -- in his comments on China by the White House ? On Thursday , at the last minute , Baker decided to cut references to the need for democracy in China out of his testimony to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee . The secretary 's spokesman insisted Friday that Baker did so simply because of the need to save time . Baker came for his congressional appearance with a prepared , written statement that singled out both Cuba and China for criticism . But by the time he spoke , the criticism had been narrowed to Cuba . `` Governments that try to shut out universally desired democratic values -- such as Castro 's Cuba or in the tragic case of China -- serve only to delay their people 's progress , '' Baker said in the written statement that was handed out to reporters . But when the time came for Baker to speak , he left out the phrases `` universally desired '' and `` in the tragic case of China . '' The question now is : Was Baker 's last-minute change a hint that the secretary may have qualms about the Bush Administration 's policy of reconciliation with the Chinese leadership -- a subject of persistent speculation ? Baker has on several occasions emphasized that it is President Bush who sets the policy toward China and has avoided any close identification with that policy . On the other hand , whether out of conviction or out of loyalty , Baker also has defended the Administration 's actions toward China in public and has worked hard to help Bush stave off a defeat on China issues in Congress . At a State Department briefing Friday , Margaret Tutwiler , Baker 's spokeswoman , dismissed speculation about his motives . `` He took ( the reference to China ) out and made his statement shorter because he wanted to make it shorter , '' Tutwiler explained . She also pointed out that Baker cut several other lengthy passages out of his prepared speech . One reporter noted that the references to China in Baker 's speech were so short that `` if I say them real fast , I bet I can say them in a second . '' But Baker 's spokeswoman stuck to her explanation . `` I ca n't tell you that it was intentional or not intentional , '' she said . `` Draw your own conclusions . ''