While friends and admirers of Richard M. Nixon gathered to honor the former President on Thursday night , a boisterous crowd of nearly 500 demonstrators -- representing an eclectic mix of causes -- loudly protested the event , blocking traffic for a short time as they lay in the street . The protest was nonviolent but police arrested at least 14 demonstrators in front of the Century Plaza Hotel as the Nixon gala was beginning inside . The demonstrators , many of them in costume , chanted `` Stop GOP death squads , '' and yelled `` Shame , shame , '' as limousines unloaded guests in front of the hotel . When tuxedoed party guests leaned off balconies to eye the commotion from above , demonstrators yelled for them to jump . The group appeared to represent about 30 different causes . Malathion spraying , anti-abortion legislation , American support for Latin American regimes and the federal government 's efforts to combat AIDS all came under vocal attack . Katie Meyer , a spokeswoman for the hotel , looked on in amazement . `` It looks like something out of 1969 , '' she said . Indeed , the angry rhetoric , riot-geared police and vehemently anti-Republican sentiments of the protesters summoned up images of Nixon 's presidency , which only hours earlier had been glowingly lauded by Presidents Gerald R. Ford , Ronald Reagan and George Bush during the dedication ceremonies for the Richard M. Nixon Library and Birthplace in Yorba Linda . But the demonstrators at the Century Plaza found the dedication ceremonies offensive . `` Basically we find it outrageous that the Republican Party is spending so much energy to resurrect a man like Richard Nixon who many of us think is a criminal and should be in jail , '' said Catherine Suitor , from the Committee in Solidarity with the People of El Salvador . Maurice Stans , a former Nixon secretary of commerce who pleaded guilty to violating federal elections law while working for Nixon 's 1972 reelection campaign , dismissed the protesters : `` I say it 's the democratic process , and what they 're doing is unimportant . It 's a sign of the times we live in . '' Several dozen helmeted police stood by as the protest began and did not interfere until demonstrators blocked access to the hotel . `` It was peaceful , but it was also unlawful , '' said Fred Nixon , a spokesman for the Los Angeles Police Department . `` They were blocking the street . '' The protest dwindled shortly after the arrests , and dissipated after the hotel began routing the guests through a second entrance . Once the melee outside ended , the 1,500 guests still had to grapple with one last inconvenience : The hotel 's air conditioning failed for several hours before the party , and by the time guests arrived , it was nearly as hot inside as it had been during the dedication ceremonies earlier in the day . Still , guests mingled in an atmosphere of reunion , many commenting on the sense of family that bound Nixon 's followers and on the joy of the day 's dedication . `` The library allows for a cleansing of the Nixon record in a way that both Nixon and the public can understand and appreciate , '' said Gary Hunt , executive vice president of the Irvine Co. , who was at the party representing company president Donald Bren . `` It 's going to allow Americans who see it to make up their own minds as to what place Nixon should have in history , because it shows the good and the bad . '' The black-tie event , sponsored by movie producer Jerry Weintraub and Los Angeles lawyer Gerald L. Parskey , featured remarks by the former President and several of his most prominent supporters , including former Ambassador Walter Annenberg and comedian Bob Hope . Members of the Nixon family were also present , and as they walked onto the dais , Pat Nixon stopped to hug Delores Hope , Bob Hope 's wife . Among the other guests at Thursday night 's party were Orange County Supervisor Thomas F. Riley and his wife , Emma Jane ; former Rep. Robert E. Badham and his wife , Anne ; and George and Judie Argyros , who were also included in a special VIP reception with the Nixons before dinner . George Argyros is chairman of Arnel Development and is one of the chief sponsors of the Nixon library . As guests finished their cocktails , they crossed into the hotel 's Los Angeles Ballroom , where tables for 10 were set with floor-length forest green linen cloths and towering silver candelabra . The main course was roast loin of veal with forest mushrooms and Maderia sauce . Nixon entered to the tune of `` California , Here We Come , '' and the Rev . Billy Graham delivered the invocation . Staff writers Jeffrey A. Perlman , Lanie Jones , Ann Conway and Dana Parsons , and correspondent Laura Michaelis contributed to this report .