Mary is determined not to cry as she talks about Hansen 's disease , but she keeps a box of tissues nearby , just in case . Her condition , commonly known as leprosy , is not life-threatening . When treated , it is not contagious and has few visible symptoms , if any . But , since the 53-year-old Filipino immigrant 's illness was diagnosed nearly two years ago , she has discovered another common side effect : fear of rejection . That fear is the reason she lies to her co-workers at a San Diego sporting goods company , explaining away the small dark spots on her face and arms as `` allergies . '' That same fear makes Mary ask a reporter not to print her real name and keeps her from telling her sister , who has a `` weak heart , '' about her battle with a disease that fills most people with dread . `` You become an outcast -- in the Philippines , you sure are one if you have this , '' the tiny , dark-haired woman said recently , her delicate fingers folding and unfolding a tissue . `` I have to tell a lie . It 's not that I am ashamed . But I would like to protect my family . Nobody wants to have this . '' Mary is among a growing number of people -- nearly 160 in all -- who are fighting age-old stigmas at the Regional Hansen 's Disease Center in Pacific Beach . Housed in the county 's North San Diego Public Health Center , the federally funded program is among 11 in the country established to care for Hansen 's patients -- many of them Hispanic , Filipino or Southeast Asian immigrants -- and their families . In the United States , Hansen 's disease -- named for Armauer Hansen , a Norwegian physician who discovered its cause in 1873 -- remains quite rare . Only 6,000 of the world 's 10 million known cases live in this country , mainly in California , Florida , Hawaii , Louisiana , New York and Texas . But , in San Diego , as in other regional centers in Los Angeles and San Francisco , the influx of immigrants from Mexico , Indochina and the Philippines continues to cause the caseload to swell . That expansion comes despite the fact that Hansen 's disease , a bacterial infection that attacks the skin and nerves , is often mistaken for other things , from birthmarks to lupus . Because U.S. doctors rarely encounter the illness , many are unfamiliar with its symptoms -- usually skin lesions and sensory loss . As a result , the average patient sees several doctors over about two years before getting an accurate diagnosis . The San Diego clinic has two goals : In addition to providing medical care and counseling to patients in treatment , the four-person staff tries to increase medical professionals ' `` index of suspicion '' about the disease so that new cases are detected sooner . And , although it ca n't change the world overnight , the staff encourages patients to start by erasing the word leper from their own vocabularies . `` Leper is like nigger -- educated people should not use the word , '' said Dr. D. A. Lopez , a dermatologist and associate clinical professor at UCSD who has provided care to the area 's Hansen 's patients since 1974 . `` It 's a type of phobia that society has . But ( the word ) does not describe the patient today . '' Today , Lopez explains , the legendary deformities of Hansen 's disease are completely preventable . Only 5 % of the population is susceptible in the first place . And , for those who do get it , modern drugs can render the disease non-contagious , eliminating the need to separate people from their families in colonies , or leprosariums . Today , Lopez insists , virtually the only things that prevent people with Hansen 's disease from leading normal lives are society 's misconceptions -- and their own . `` Leprosy is not a threat to San Diego , '' said Lopez , a retired Navy captain who first encountered the disease when he was assigned to the Navy Hospital in Balboa Park . `` In reality , there 's nothing to fear from these people . They 're innocent victims caught between the germ and the body defenses . Their nerves get caught in the middle . '' Meredith , a North County resident in her 70s , remembers how frightened she was the day she bumped her leg against the sharp corner of a piece of furniture -- and could n't feel it . Born in the United States , she was not a high-risk candidate for Hansen 's disease . But she had recently been ill -- her weakened system was the perfect host for an opportunistic infection . What 's more , over her lifetime she had lived off and on in an Asian country where she had had contact with Hansen 's patients . Meredith , who also asked that her real name not be revealed , immediately suspected what doctors would later confirm . But she caught her Hansen 's early , started immediate treatment and avoided visible symptoms . `` If you go to the clinic , there 's really nothing to worry about , '' she says now . In Asia , she recalled , `` Some people really did suffer -- open sores , they could n't walk , their feet were bad . But it never needs to get that way . '' Finding treatment is the first hurdle . Keeping a positive outlook throughout what can be years of treatment is another . Despite the medical breakthroughs that address the physical symptoms , a diagnosis of Hansen 's takes a psychological toll . Some patients try to deny the problem , quitting their medicines at the first sign of improvement . Others are tightly wound with fear . Carol Frank , the center 's senior public health nurse , remembers one man who was improving , but for one thing : at the clinic , his blood pressure was always sky-high . When measured at home , however , it was normal . Finally , he admitted that visiting the clinic sent him into a tailspin -- he was terrified that he would run into someone he knew . Indeed , some Hansen 's patients opt to keep the condition secret , even from their spouses . For them , especially , the clinic becomes a vital part of survival . There , they can share their frustrations with the medicines , which often darken the skin . They can air their guilt and anger , or rehearse what to say to a loved one learning about Hansen 's for the first time . As well as prescriptions , Frank makes sure the clinic dispenses plenty of physical affection , from handshakes to hugs . Many Hansen 's patients feel unlovable , betrayed by their bodies , she explains -- especially those who have lost sensation ( usually in the hands and feet ) before treatment began . `` We think pain is the enemy . But they get no input . Their self-image is lost , '' said Lopez . `` When sensation is gone , it 's a very lonely life . '' Hansen 's disease does not cause parts of the body to fall off , as many people believe . But , if not managed carefully , it can have other harmful effects . People with numbness in their extremities sometimes wear their shoes too tight , causing sores . They ca n't feel when their cigarettes burn too near their hands . Sometimes they pound their fingers with too much force , causing a shortening of the bones . To avoid these potentially crippling problems , Hansen 's patients must overcome a natural tendency to regard their insensitive limbs as objects -- a phenomenon best illustrated by the story , often repeated by Hansen 's specialists , of a man who helped with the cooking in his village by sticking his hands into hot coals to retrieve potatoes that fell off the grill . `` They were utensils to him . They were n't his hands , they were more like a shovel or a spade , '' said Frank . `` People do n't care about insensitive parts . They have to learn to love a part they ca n't feel . '' Her advice to patients : `` You have to look at your hands and feet as your babies that ca n't cry . '' As well as maintaining a detailed regimen of self-examination , regular clinic visits and hygiene , patients must also learn how best to heal their psychic wounds and to brace for inevitable insults . A few years ago , for example , one young patient at the clinic decided it would be best if he told his co-workers about his condition . He was fired . Frank told him his employer 's behavior was illegal , but the young man refused to return , opting instead to find another job . Efforts to debunk the myths surrounding Hansen 's disease are often thwarted by seemingly reputable sources . In most editions of the Bible , for example , the ghastly symptoms attributed to leprosy actually are a composite of a variety of diseases , from fungal infections to psoriasis . ( The Hebrew word , zara 'ath , was translated `` leprosy '' long before the modern usage of the term had restricted it to a single specific disease ) . What 's worse , the Bible clearly suggests that leprosy is God 's way of punishing sinners -- a belief that clinic workers find they must regularly refute . `` This is a germ , not the biblical disease , '' Frank has explained again and again . But even for people of other faiths , the stigma is powerful . Frank says one young Cambodian boy refused treatment because , he said , `` that 's how I 'm supposed to be . This is punishment for past wrongs . '' Frightening Hollywood images depicted in film classics such as `` Ben Hur '' -- pitiable hammer-footed souls with their wounds wrapped in gauze -- do n't help matters any . Neither do current movie previews , like one airing now for `` The Two Jakes , '' in which Jack Nicholson describes the secret to his success like this : `` In this town , I 'm the leper with the most fingers . '' One-liners like that make Frank cringe -- for every off-hand remark , she knows she will probably field scores of worried questions . One woman whose daughter had sent her a handbag made by Hansen 's sufferers in Africa called the clinic . Would she get sick , she asked , if she slung it over her shoulder ? An agitated businessman expressed alarm when he received a fund-raising appeal in his morning mail from a leprosarium in the Philippines . He wanted to know if he should he keep his staff from touching it ? Frank 's response : Do n't panic . Though technically Hansen 's Disease is an infectious condition , more than 90 % of the population could n't get it if they tried -- especially not from a handbag . ( Research scientists speculate that the disease is probably transmitted much like tuberculosis , through the upper respiratory tract . ) Doctors can also be ignorant . Lopez remembers completing his rounds one day in a San Diego hospital . Afterward , when he and his fellow physicians compared notes , Lopez told them he believed one patient they had seen had Hansen 's . `` One doctor stood up , got pale , started perspiring and ran to wash his hands , '' Lopez said . `` This kind of an impulse is automatic until we learn . '' Despite this ingrained prejudice , Lopez believes his patients will flourish if they fight the urge to retreat from the world . He discourages all but the most ill from getting disability classifications that allow them to park in handicapped parking spaces . He encourages them to take an active part in their own treatment and generally tries to squelch what he calls `` the 'poor me syndrome . ' `` '' I want them to think of themselves as ( they would ) other people , '' Lopez said . In that vein , visitors to the clinic could probably take a lesson from one long-time patient , a Mexican man in his 30s whose disease was diagnosed in 1982 . `` I am a person who likes work , life . . . ( I say ) thank you for another day , thank you ( that ) I can walk , thank you that I can eat ; in my mind , for me , I feel strong , ' `` he told Frank in a tape-recorded interview . `` I know this Hansen 's is very , very strong and the problem for another person might be , ' I ca n't do it . ' ( But ) I can learn with being sick . I can live with the Hansen 's . '' For him , the first step to healing was choosing his words . `` The skin specialist doctor said , 'Your problem is Hansen 's , ' `` he said . `` I never used 'la lepra , ' because it is not necessary with my problem to use that word . . . . A lot of people would say , 'Do you have la lepra ? OK , I ca n't touch . ' `` Facts About Hansen 's Disease * Known cases : 10 million worldwide . Of those , 6,000 live in the United States . * Only 5 % of the world population is susceptible , earning Hansen 's the title of the least infectious of the infectious diseases . * In the U.S. , most cases occur in foreign-born people . * Symptoms : sudden loss of feeling in hands or feet ; painful swelling or bumpiness of skin , especially on the face , hands and feet ; loss of eyelashes or outer edges of eyebrows ; earlobes swollen and turned out . * Period between exposure and the onset of illness : six months to 20 years . * There is no vaccine for Hansen 's disease and no test to determine if a person has been exposed . However , the disease is completely treatable with drug therapies . Myths and Realities : The myth : Hansen 's disease is caused by eating spoiled fish ; by engaging too frequently in sex ; by drinking tainted water . The reality : Hansen 's disease is caused by Mycobacterium leprae , a bacterium that can infect the skin and nerves . Although it remains a mystery why some people are more susceptible to the disease , scientists believe it is an opportunistic infection that takes root when a person 's immune system is overloaded . The myth : Hansen 's disease is a scourge delivered upon sinners by God . The reality : In the Bible , the word `` leprosy '' is used to describe the symptoms of a variety of diseases -- a translation that has become outdated since the term now refers to a single , specific disease . Scientists see no link between the illness and immoral behavior . The myth : Hansen 's disease causes parts of the body to fall off . The reality : The most troubling development if the disease goes untreated is a gradual numbing of the extremities , which results in injuries sometimes going unnoticed . Injuries that become infected can lead to potentially crippling deformities . But , with care , these deformities are preventable .