A pipe bomb Friday destroyed a van driven by the wife of the captain of the cruiser Vincennes , which mistakenly shot down an Iranian airliner last year . Authorities suspect it was a terrorist attack . Sharon Rogers , 50 , escaped just seconds before the van burst into flames . A Justice Department source in Washington who spoke on condition of anonymity said investigators suspect that the bombing was the work of terrorists . The FBI said it had not ruled out anything . Mrs. Rogers was uninjured and was taken to a police station , where she was joined by her husband , Capt . Will Rogers III . Rogers was home at the time of the blast . Authorities placed the family under protection . Their son was away at college and was notified . Mrs. Rogers , a schoolteacher , was driving alone to school and was stopped at a red light when the bomb exploded at 7:45 a.m. She jumped out as fire quickly gutted the van . Rogers was in charge of the San Diego-based Vincennes in July when the guided-missile cruiser , on duty in the Persian Gulf , mistakenly shot down a civilian Iran Air Airbus A300 carrying 290 people . Everyone aboard was killed . No one claimed responsibility for the car bombing . `` We have no motive at this point in time -- certainly , we have no suspects , '' Tom Hughes , special agent in charge of the local FBI office , told a press conference . `` We certainly do not rule out the potential retribution to Capt . Rogers for his . . . command in the Navy . '' The explosive was attached to the white Toyota van 's undercarriage , said San Diego Police Department spokesman Bill Robinson . Fire department officials agreed . `` The device that was thought to be a pipe bomb was confirmed , '' Robinson said . Nevertheless , the FBI was not prepared to confirm the type of explosive device , the type of explosive material used or how it was detonated , Hughes said . A message from Rogers was relayed by Cmdr . David Dillon , spokesman for the Naval Surface Force Pacific Fleet , to which the Vincennes is assigned . `` I talked with Capt . Rogers and Mrs. Rogers this morning at the police station . They wanted to pass on that Mrs. Rogers was fine and in good shape . '' Asked about Rogers ' reaction to the bombing , Dillon said , `` I think he 's just exasperated by the whole thing . Obviously he 's concerned about what happened to his wife . They just want to get on to other things . '' The Rogerses were being taken to a secret secure place where they will stay indefinitely , Dillon said . Their son also was under protection . Dillon said he did not believe any other Vincennes crewmen were being protected . But the Navy increased its security at the San Diego Navy Base and other facilities , Navy Chief Craig Huebler said . Other Vincennes crew members and their families were notified . The Vincennes returned from its six-month Persian Gulf deployment last October . It remains in port and Rogers remains its skipper . As the Vincennes exchanged fire with Iranian speedboats last July 3 , Iran Air Flight 655 appeared on the U.S. warship 's high-tech radar . After the plane failed to respond to warnings on civilian and military channels , Rogers gave the order to fire . Compensation for Victims The decision , he said later , was in defense of his ship and crew . But what Rogers feared was an Iranian F-14 fighter actually was the Airbus A300 . The Reagan Administration defended the decision but also decided to compensate the victims ' families . After the shooting , Iran 's Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini called for an all-out war against the United States . Speculation after the destruction of a Pan Am jetliner over Lockerbie , Scotland , in December has focused on whether that bombing was in retaliation for the Vincennes ' action . ( Immediately after the plane crashed , a group claimed responsibility . But its claims were discounted at first . ) In Washington , Navy officials at the Pentagon said they were unaware of any threats against Rogers or his family , but were awaiting additional reports from San Diego . Eyewitness Account Construction worker Kurt Lent said he heard what sounded like a pair of backfires , with a 10-second interval , then a loud blast . `` It went 'Boom ! ' 'Boom ! ' then 'Bam ! '' ' he said . `` It worked real quick . '' Seeing that Mrs. Rogers had escaped the van , Lent ran to the flaming vehicle to make sure that no one else was inside . He and fellow workers directed traffic while their supervisor escorted her to a pickup . `` She was shaken up , obviously , '' said Lew Davis , another worker . Police sealed off the area , and the FBI took over the investigation from local authorities . Naval Investigative Service officials also were called in .