In a one-shot effort to sell tickets during the summer doldrums , Continental Airlines on Sunday launched what could become a short-term fare war by dramatically cutting prices on round-trips beginning later this week . The airline will charge a flat round-trip fare of $ 152 for some seats on nearly all of its 1,400 daily flights . To qualify for the fare , travelers must leave this Thursday , Friday or Saturday but they may return any time they like , beginning Sunday . United Airlines responded to Continental 's announcement by saying that it will match the fares in all markets where the two carriers compete . Other airlines either could not be reached for comment or said they were still considering the fare cuts . Big Savings With the one-time discount , a round-trip flight between Los Angeles and Newark , the airport Continental serves in the New York metropolitan area , will cost roughly half of the lowest `` MaxSaver '' fares . These round-trip fares normally range from $ 278 to $ 318 , depending on when they are scheduled . A full , unrestricted one-way coach fare between the two cities costs $ 588 . Continental said a family of four traveling between Boston and Los Angeles would save $ 744 from the lowest fares currently available . The fare would be $ 608 instead of $ 1,352 for the same travel on a regular discount ticket . Continental said it is offering the `` Spirit of '76 '' fares -- the price will be $ 76 each way -- partly because it expects business travel to be light this week , with the Independence Day holiday falling on Tuesday . The airline said it is making more than 200,000 seats available at the low fares during the three-day sale period . Although airlines do not reveal the number of seats allocated to cut-rate fares , Ned Walker , a Continental spokesman , estimated that the average flight would carry about 50 passengers on the new low fares . Thus , on a Boeing 727 flight , for example , more than a third of the seats will be allocated to the promotional fares . Continental 's DC-9s carry about 100 passengers and its Boeing 747s have seats for about 400 passengers . Unlike the MaxSaver fares pioneered by Continental in 1987 and matched by all of the other carriers , the `` Spirit of '76 '' fares carry no restrictions , though they are not refundable . A traveler must make a return trip reservation at the time the ticket is purchased this weekend . However , for an extra $ 75 for each round-trip ticket , the return travel date may be changed . This would make the round-trip fare $ 227 , still lower than the nearest low fare in many cases . `` This may be a move by Continental to get the consumer to believe that low fares are not gone forever , '' said Paul Karos , airline analyst with First Boston Corp. , a New York brokerage house . `` There will always be promotions like this to fend off the backlash of travelers who are unhappy about higher airline fares . '' Karos added that `` there is clearly elasticity in the industry when it comes to fares . As fares go up , the number of passengers comes down . ''