Listen to the grandfather : `` I remember my first baseball glove . Cost me $ 2.9 -- and I saved more than four months to get it . '' Imagine him back then , a black and poor teenager in Tennessee during the early 1930s , having fallen in love with academics and athletics but knowing neither would be possible beyond high school . Listen to the son : `` I was a high school all-American halfback ( in 1960 ) . Had about 75 or 80 scholarship offers . Yet I could not go to college in the southeastern or southwestern portions of this country . '' See him now , prosperous from sport , a member of three National Football League championship teams and in the Pro Football Hall of Fame . Listen to the grandson : `` My dream is to play baseball professionally . '' An infielder , like his grandfather , he can climb as high as his abilities allow on the field . Off it , will he be able to run the team for whom he ran ? So often the evolution of America 's playground gets explained only in weighty and complicated ways . Franchise movement . Race relations . Free agency . Salary escalation . Proposition 48 . What if we could examine most of those issues and concepts through some flesh-and-blood humans who experienced them ? What if we got lucky and found three generations of a single family that could tie 60-some years of sport together simply by talking about themselves ? Spend some time with the Warfields of central and northeastern Ohio and the abstract comes alive . Sadness for 74-year-old Dryden Warfield and hope for 17-year-old Malcolm Warfield . Denial , opportunity and glory for the link , Paul Warfield , a son and a father at 47 . As the Warfield story unfolds , from Dryden to Paul and to Malcolm , so do the attitudes Americans have about sports -- and about ourselves . Six decades ago , major league baseball was a small triangular slice of the United States , extending from Boston to St. Louis , back to Washington , D.C. , and up the East Coast . The National Football League was a loose collection of teams that included the Milwaukee Badgers and Staten Island Stapletons . Pro basketball was even less stable . Worse for Dryden Warfield , the chalky lines on his field of dreams might as well have been barricades . In the den of a home in Columbus that would be elegant in all but a few neighborhoods nationwide , Paul Warfield used his wide receiver 's hands to illustrate progress from generation to generation to generation . My father 's chances were this limited , he said , one palm almost touching the other . My chances had improved this much , he went on , spreading his hands perhaps two feet apart . Malcolm 's chances are this grand , he was pleased to acknowledge by throwing his hands almost as far apart as they would go . Only upper management positions in corporations , and corporate sport , still are limited for blacks . `` I was one of the first players in the National Football League paid enough not to have to work in the offseason , '' Paul Warfield said , adding with a smile that the rookie salary , in 1964 , that made leisure an option was $ 20,000 . This season , 27 major league baseball players will earn at least $ 2 million . Guthrie in the 1930s was a town of about 1,500 split both by race and the Kentucky-Tennessee border . Dryden Warfield was born and raised on the Tennessee side . Anticipating a girl , his parents had decided on the name Lena Dryden weeks before his birth and stuck with it , Dryden being the first name of the doctor who delivered his mother . `` We were baseball crazy , '' Dryden said . `` Played baseball on Christmas if the weather was nice . Baseball . Baseball . I did n't think I could love anything more than baseball , until I got into football . '' That came later , in high school . `` Everything was segregated , '' Dryden said . `` But , really and truthfully , where we were from , whites and blacks got along . Never diehard segregation like in the Deep South . Everything amiable as long as you took care of your own affairs . You knew your road ; you took that . '' At age 12 or 13 , Dryden knew he had to have the baseball glove that all but crooked a leather finger at him from the window of a store offering things both practical and dreamy . To a youngster , a glove is a necessity of life ; to Ed Warfield , trying to support a wife and 10 children on a railroad yardman 's pay , it might as well have been the Hope Diamond . `` I saw it a little before Christmas , '' Dryden said . `` Think I finally bought it early in April . If you wanted something , well , you put the money back and waited until you got enough . I worked at real little jobs . White people wanted you to do this , that and the other . '' With that glove , Dryden and his buddies occasionally played white teams . Twice a year at least . So even then some barriers in sport were stretched , if nowhere close to broken . Never was Dryden at shortstop able to look to his right and see a white third baseman . Harder to deal with than baseball and race for Dryden was baseball and religion . That was a black-and-white issue on which most blacks and whites agreed : no sport on Sunday . Keep in mind that in the mid '20s and early '30s much of America was rural and small town , connected in large part by the railroad and the Bible . Until he left for work in Warren , Ohio , in early October 1936 , Dryden never ventured more than 20 miles from Guthrie . His daily routine as a youngster was nearly as confined , weekdays being for school and baseball and Sundays for morning and evening worship . `` You know how boys are , '' said Dryden , about to explain small devilment . `` Sundays ( after noon ) were our free day . One time , I might have been 12 or so , six or seven of us went down Kentucky . '' He laughed . The experience , still vivid , might only have been three quarters of a mile from home , but that 's what youngsters from the Tennessee side called it . Down Kentucky . Anyway , Dryden and his buddies this Sunday afternoon came upon some other boys playing baseball -- and everyone was having a fine time . His friends wondered : Can anything so pure and pleasurable as baseball ever be a sin ? They decided no and , with some coaxing , Dryden shortly joined them . Dryden was a fine player , a right-handed-hitting shortstop with power , something on the order of a shorter and slightly more compact Ernie Banks . Quietly , he offered a comparison with his son , considered a major league prospect 30 years later before choosing pro football : `` Paul never could hit a ball as far as I could . '' That Sunday , Dryden was powerless in every way you could imagine . Powerless against temptation ; powerless at bat . `` Popup , groundout , '' he said , mystified to this day . `` That was n't my nature . It looked like something was in the way . I could n't concentrate . Just something about Sunday ball . It was bred in me . '' Boys being boys even when they officially are young men , Dryden gave Sunday baseball another go several years later , at about age 18 . He fared fairly well in two games , but had run out on his duties with the church choir to play in them . Ed Warfield talked with his son one evening and said a decision had to be made : quit the church or quit baseball . The choice being so rigidly either-or , Dryden said : `` I never played any more baseball on Sunday . '' Which mostly explains why Paul Warfield has no memories of Dryden Warfield at play . When he went to high school , he became infatuated with a new game called football . `` I fell in love with it , '' he said . `` Because of the contact . Boy against boy ; muscle against muscle . '' Football was 12 miles from home , that being the distance to the closest black high school in Tennessee , Burt , named for the man who financed its construction . Monday through Friday , Dryden would ride a Louisville & Nashville train to and from the Clarksville school . During three years with the Burt varsity , Dryden played left guard on offense , then stayed along the line of scrimmage and played left guard on defense . Bursts of the kind of speed Paul would flash for the Cleveland Browns and Miami Dolphins during a dozen seasons in the NFL were frequent enough for Dryden to drop off into pass coverage now and then . `` All that was wrong with football was that the season was too short , '' he said . `` After Thanksgiving , it was over . I just hated to see Thanksgiving come . '' Much more upsetting was the end of high school , in 1934 , for it ended not only sports for Dryden but also the education he had taken to with almost as much enthusiasm . His father had been retired two years earlier ; his seven older brothers and sisters had left home . Still , Ed 's railroad pension was not nearly enough to keep the dwindling family going without help . No way was college an option , although Dryden did take time to talk with his high school principal about finding one . `` Let 's face it , '' he said . `` We were too poor . Just could n't do it . I could n't go . '' Had the times not been so tough , Dryden would have followed the rail line to Nashville and attended Tennessee State or Fisk . Football ? Dryden Warfield did n't even own one . `` After high school , '' he said , `` there was no work . Period . It was just a matter of trying to exist , really . If something did n't happen to pass through , or some job was created , well , you just did n't have it . '' An older brother , William , had gone to Warren and gotten a job with Republic Steel . In the summer of 1936 , home on vacation , he told Dryden steadier work in the mill at far better pay was available . A couple of months later , two years out of high school , Dryden and his new wife , Omelia , took the train about 550 miles and joined William in the Ohio mill town near the Pennsylvania border . Twenty-four years in the future , Dryden 's son would bring a small measure of lasting fame to Warren . Looking back at Guthrie , Dryden said : `` My life does n't sound exciting . But I had a great time . I had a great childhood . There just was n't the money . '' Half a generation before Jackie Robinson broke the color line in the major leagues , there was opportunity for young blacks in pro baseball . And many a fan in Guthrie pegged Dryden Warfield as a future star in the Negro league . `` But those teams were far away , '' he said . `` And I do n't think I would have liked the lifestyle . Eating and sleeping on buses . Up all night and playing the next day ( including Sunday ) . I was comfortable at home . That way of living would n't have suited me at all . '' Dryden chooses to look more kindly on Guthrie and its ways than Paul . The son recalled his first time there , in the early '50s , when he was about 11 . Inside a movie theater , striding toward front row center , he had his arm gently tugged by a cousin . We must go this way , he was told . Upstairs . The father shook his head and said , as that memory and another flashed into his mind : `` I used to clean up that theater . '' It was one of the ways he stayed alive . In the fall of of 1959 and the winter of 1960 , Woody Hayes and lots of coaches only slightly less famous made their way east on Park Street in Warren , Ohio , turned right on Federal and immediately into a double-car driveway . Inside a small house , they all but begged Paul Warfield to accept their offer of a college scholarship -- courtesy of football . What sweet irony that was to Dryden , for whom structured sport and formal education had not been possible after high school . By happy coincidence , the area that provided steady work and decent wages in the mid '30s for the father had , a quarter-century later , given the son maximum athletic exposure in high school . Elite Ohioans in football , baseball and track and field also crack the national who 's who lists -- and Paul Warfield was exceptional in all three . `` He got the love of the games from me , '' Dryden said . `` His mother did n't care for sports . And my father had no athletic ability at all . Never thought of sports . Too busy trying to support his family . '' Major league baseball and football in the late '50s were becoming coast-to-coast businesses . Advances in airline travel were such that even Southern Cal felt there was a chance Paul would accept its offer of a football scholarship . `` But there was not the ghost of a chance I could consider schools like the University of Alabama , '' Paul Warfield said . `` I recall very vividly Governor Wallace standing on the schoolhouse steps , defying a U.S. marshal ( to admit black students ) . I was pretty much restricted , in big-time college football , to the area of the Big Ten . '' Dryden remembers a handwritten letter from Darrell Royal pitching the University of Texas , so the Deep South was not totally off-limits . But Paul felt most comfortable near home , with Woody Hayes and Ohio State . The Warfields turned down tempting offers from the Tigers , Indians and White Sox out of high school ; Paul walked away from baseball his second spring in college . `` I told the coach one of the reasons I would n't be playing baseball was because of a 14-day swing the team took each season through the Deep South , '' Paul said . `` I said there 's no way you can guarantee me I wo n't face an embarrassing situation . Or a threatening situation . As a youngster , I was terrified of the prospect of going into the Deep South . '' Paul 's offseason sport at Ohio State was track and field , specifically the long jump . In 1962 he and a black sprinter from Purdue stayed in a dorm at the University of Houston while taking part in a meet prior to the NCAA outdoor championships . They thought little of it , until students at Texas Southern , with whom they visited while in town , made such a fuss . Warfield and his wife were denied an apartment that caught their fancy his first year as a professional football player , in Cleveland in 1964 . He and three Browns teammates could not get their shoes shined in Birmingham two years later , even though the men who would be doing the job also were black . That and some other reasons were why his son would be named in honor of Malcolm X. Paul got his degree from Ohio State , but not until four years after he left . Dryden pushed him to earn the few remaining credits ; the main motivation came from Hayes , who greeted his former star so similarly for Paul to think his name had been changed to Did You Graduate Yet . There was competition between the American and National leagues when Paul turned professional , although the big money started a year later , in 1965 , when Joe Namath bestrode Broadway . Paul did hit football 's lottery , about a decade later , when he , Larry Csonka and Jim Kiick bolted the Dolphins for a fling with Memphis of the quickly deflated World Football League . `` My base salary was four times what I 'd been getting '' with the Dolphins after winning back-to-back Super Bowls , he said . `` Here we were , three top players on the best team in the NFL and none of us was making six figures . And our bonuses were astronomical . We were in disbelief . '' So in addition to playing better than all but a benchful of players in the history of pro football , Warfield was among the few who had control , however briefly , of his career . But he also was traded , in 1970 , from the Browns to a team that did n't exist when he turned pro , the Dolphins . And Miami `` is n't exactly the Deep South . '' Since retiring in 1977 , Warfield has worked in television and in personnel with the Browns and currently does commentary on Ohio State football . He owns a temporary-employment services business , which means he has an easier time attending Malcolm 's games than Dryden had breaking free for his . Malcolm began to fully appreciate his father when he watched him being inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1983 . Only 11 , he had not realized Paul 's immense impact on the NFL and it made being `` son of '' much easier to tolerate . But his sport of choice was baseball . Paul can not recall his father in an athletic moment , mainly because Dryden often worked the night and overnight shifts at Republic . Saturday was for keeping up the house , Sunday devoted to church . Even if there had been time for , say , bowling , Paul recalls , they probably would not have been comfortable in many alleys . Also , fathers of Dryden 's generation are not inclined to brag about themselves . Paul 's exploits are as close to Malcolm as a tape popped into a VCR . For an 11th-grade speech required for graduation , Malcolm a few weeks ago chose life with a former NFL player and executive . The bright side was obvious , being around famous players , fooling around with the computer on Paul 's desk that stored every salary in the league . `` I also talked about Don Rogers , '' the Browns safety whose death by drug-related causes came not long after Len Bias 's in 1986 , Malcolm said . `` I was a big fan of his ; my father and he were close . When he died , that showed me athletes really are n't immortal . I 'd always thought of them as being superior to everyone else ... I really grew up after that . '' Growing up as an infielder majoring in third base just now , Malcolm is almost certain to be recruited heavily by college baseball teams . Only football and basketball scholarships were prevalent when Paul was a teenager ; college baseball more and more is becoming an accepted path toward the majors -- and Deep South colleges unwilling to recruit Paul may be anxious to woo Malcolm . Malcolm will be eligible to play as a freshman , the restrictive academic hurdle called Proposition 48 almost surely easy for him to leap over . In his college era , Paul could not play varsity sports as a freshman -- and is grateful for it . For Dryden Warfield , Paul 's induction into the Pro Football Hall of Fame was a proud day made more emotional because Omelia had passed away almost exactly seven years earlier . Still , fathers never strut quite so airily as when their sons excel in high school . `` It 's all new then , '' he said . Dryden recalled walking through the parking lot after the Warren G. Harding Panthers of Warren had gone across the nearby Pennsylvania line and beaten a team from Sharon . To a Harding woman who did not know him , Dryden could not help teasing : `` That Warfield is n't so great . He had a terrible game . '' Well , the woman all but went for his throat . How dare you say anything bad about Paul Warfield ? She was white . Paul 's middle name is Dryden , same as his father 's ; serious consideration is being given to changing Malcolm 's middle name from Joseph to Dryden . Still firmly ensconced about 130 miles away in Warren , the grandfather stretches on an easy chair in his den and declares : `` I am 74 . My father was 99 years and 6 months when he died . I hope to top him . '' That offers the chance for another Warfield generation , the fourth , to grow and mature . Who knows what wonders Dryden might find available for a great-grandchild .