The Hawthorne City Council has tentatively selected Public Works Director James H. Mitsch to replace retiring City Manager R. Kenneth Jue . Mitsch was chosen to be the next city manager during a closed-door session Monday , according to city officials . Jue , who has been with the city for 24 years , notified the council two weeks ago that he will retire effective Dec. 31 , 1990 . The council is expected to confirm Mitsch 's selection at its Jan. 22 meeting . Jue , 57 , became city manager in 1977 after being city engineer for 11 years and working 13 years as assistant engineer with the city of Inglewood . Jue , who recommended Mitsch as his replacement , said he wants to retire while he is young enough to enjoy some of his favorite pastimes -- such as woodcraft and motorcycle riding . Jue 's annual salary is $ 105,000 , and he will retire with a yearly pension of about $ 66,000 , according to Doug Gates , Hawthorne 's personnel director . Mitsch came to the city in 1966 as assistant city engineer and has held several positions at City Hall , including city engineer . He was also acting city manager for almost a year in 1971 . In interviews this week , city officials said Mitsch is the best qualified to succeed Jue and that they expect a smooth transition . City officials characterized Mitsch as a highly qualified replacement who understands the city 's inner workings and who knows how to stay clear of internal political squabbles . `` He works well with everybody , '' Jue said . `` It should be a smooth transition . '' Councilwoman Ginny Lambert agreed . `` He 's the very best person to fill Kenny Jue 's shoes , '' she said . However , Mitsch 's role in City Hall has not always been free of controversy . A county grand jury criticized him in 1983 , saying a local engineering company he owned posed a potential conflict of interest . In 1987 , he was suspended by the city when it was learned that he still owned the firm . Mitsch later sold the company , and city officials said this week that the conflict-of-interest allegations have been put to rest . Jue received accolades for his years of service to the city . Jue -- who is regarded by his City Hall colleagues as a quiet and reserved man -- is also known as a hard worker who is respected and admired by his staff . Mayor Betty J. Ainsworth said Jue has done an excellent job as city manager . She praised him for helping to organize several redevelopment projects that are about to start in the city . Ainsworth said she is happy the council decided to hire a replacement from within City Hall . `` I 've been here long enough to know that when you promote from within , it makes it a smoother transition and the employees are happier , '' she said . Although Jue 's tenure with the city has been generally characterized in glowing terms , he has had some difficult times , too . Last July , Jue came under fire by some staff members and city activists when he recommended that the city lay off as many as 32 employees to resolve an anticipated $ 2.5-million budget deficit for 1989-90 . The financial crisis stemmed from an unexpected drop in revenue from sales taxes and paramedic fees , according to city officials . To avert the layoffs , the City Council voted in August to increase numerous municipal fees . Jue said this week that city officials will need to find new ways to pay for a proposal to hire at least five new police officers to help fight the city 's increasing crime rate . Jue and Mitsch have had a long-term off-duty business relationship . For at least eight years they have been co-owners of an Inglewood apartment building . In addition , Mitsch once owned Centinela Valley Engineering , a Hawthorne firm founded by Jue . Jue divested himself of the firm two years before Mitsch acquired it . Mitsch 's difficulties began in 1983 , when a Los Angeles County grand jury in a report on Hawthorne government criticized his involvement with Centinela Valley Engineering as a possible conflict of interest . At the time , Mitsch denied that Centinela Valley Engineering did any surveys in Hawthorne , but Jue said there were indications that the firm had conducted surveys in the city . Jue said that after the grand jury report was released he told Mitsch to sever all ties with the company . But in August , 1987 , after learning that Mitsch had continued to work with Centinela Valley Engineering , Jue suspended him for 30 days . In interviews this week , both Jue and Mitsch said the problems surrounding the engineering company have been addressed . `` It was put to bed , '' Jue said of the matter . `` He got a penalty and he divested himself '' of the company . Said Mitsch : `` It 's been resolved . ''