We lead hectic lives . And when the pressures , distractions or expectations get to be too much , it 's nice to get away for a while . Everybody needs a place to call his own . Hot Topics wonders , `` When you want to be alone , where do you go ? '' `` I first go to the refrigerator , grab all the food , then go in the den , shut the door and turn on the radio and TV to the maximum volume . '' Chantal Dreis , 15 , freshman , Santa Margarita '' I go to my favorite bookstore and plop myself down on the floor in the classic-literature section for a couple of hours and read , read , read . '' Jean Selden , 17 , senior , Connelly '' I go to the beach and watch the surfers . They do look mighty fine in their wet suits . '' Charity Dailey , 17 , senior , Southern California Christian '' I get into my car and drive . I try to get out of El Toro and drive to the beach or somewhere scenic like that . Being in my car listening to the radio calms me down if I 'm upset or stressed . '' Shannon Vedomske , 17 , senior , El Toro '' I go in my bedroom closet because it 's dark and confining . '' Meridith Schaeffer , 16 , sophomore , Troy '' I go outside and play basketball against my garage . It helps me take my mind off things when I 'm doing something I enjoy . '' Ian Hanigan , 16 , junior , Saddleback '' I go beddy-bye . When I wake , my troubles have faded like an old pair of Levis . '' Mike Hallock , 17 , senior , Cypress '' I 'll just find a corner somewhere . '' Scott Yi , 17 , senior , Villa Park '' I usually go to the batting cages and practice my batting . '' Lupe Trujillo , 16 , sophomore , Bolsa Grande '' I try to go to the tide pools . I take a folding chair and just sit and watch -- sometimes for hours . This is the time when I feel closest to God -- like he 's right there and we 're hanging out . '' Sarah Decker , 17 , senior , Southern California Christian '' Probably the bathroom because it 's the only place that I can close the door and have some peace . '' Sunny Winkler , 17 , senior , Connelly '' I walk down the side of a railroad track and think . '' Michelle Hinkle , 18 , senior , Bolsa Grande '' I go jogging because I can let everything out and get away . '' Carey Biermann , 15 , freshman , Santa Margarita '' I sit in my back yard underneath my tree . '' Mindy Davis , 18 , senior , Cypress '' I go to the Marine base . I sit on the Tarmac between buildings and there are no people around -- just hundreds of ducks . I ca n't really explain why I go there . I ca n't explain what I feel . But it 's more peaceful and glorious than anything else I 've experienced . '' David Berke , 17 , senior , El Toro '' I go in the middle of my room , turn off the lights and meditate . '' Samantha Sangana , 16 , sophomore , Troy '' My room ; it 's the only place that 's mine . '' Cindy Nguyen , 15 , freshman , Villa Park '' I grab the book I 'm reading , sit down and withdraw from reality for a while , until I 'm ready to come back . '' Thom Lancaster , 18 , senior , Southern California Christian '' I go fishing . This enables me to gather up my thoughts and also gives me time to do something about them . '' Gabe Regalado , 16 , sophomore , Bolsa Grande '' I bike over to a nearby park and sit and I feed the ducks . '' Sarah Jans , 15 , freshman , Santa Margarita '' I air out my pent-up feelings during a walk in the neighborhood . '' Thich Hong , 18 , senior , Saddleback '' I go on my roof because I like being outside and nobody will find me . '' Eric Douglass , 16 , sophomore , El Toro '' I go to my room and put the chair against the door because I have no lock . '' Patty Tsai , 17 , senior , Connelly '' I retreat into a hiding place deep within my mind . It is a place where I can go to be at peace with myself or with the world , a place to solve my problems , a place to be with God . '' Chris Kahau , 18 , senior , Southern California Christian '' The Back Bay in Newport Beach to watch the sun set and enjoy the natural surroundings . '' Tim Murphy , 18 , senior , Bolsa Grande '' I go into the bathroom with a People magazine . '' Jean-Michel Florent , 15 , freshman , Santa Margarita '' I usually take refuge in my room for a couple of hours or take a long walk and listen to music . '' Ilyse Sanford , 16 , sophomore , Saddleback '' I often go running . It loosens me up and relieves tension . '' Linda Taboy , 16 , sophomore , El Toro '' Sometimes I take a long walk . '' Mary Beth Maiden , 15 , sophomore , Southern California Christian '' I go to my room ; if my sister is in there , I go sit in a tree . '' Kristy Roak , 16 , junior , Bolsa Grande '' I regress into my mind . '' Amanda Cobb , 17 , junior , Santa Margarita '' I spend time going to places , riding my bike and just basically getting out into the open . '' Tommy Simonovski , 14 , freshman , Saddleback '' I used to go upstairs into my bonus room because most of my family stays downstairs . This room is good because it has many things to entertain me . '' Brad Milby , 17 , senior , El Toro '' I go to the beach , because it helps me to relax and have fun . '' Tanya Britton , 16 , junior , Villa Park '' My bedroom . I turn up the stereo real loud and sit in my bean-bag chair . '' Jake Landmesser , 16 , sophomore , Villa Park Next Week 's Hot Topic : Do you have any enemies and , if so , what did you do to upset them ? Responses gathered by Brandi Winemiller ( Bolsa Grande ) , Jennifer Chen ( Connelly ) , Blythe Latimer ( Cypress ) , Dawn Stone ( El Toro ) , Nguyen-Hong Hoang ( Saddleback ) , Suzanne Zamoyski ( Santa Margarita ) , Stacey Kimsey ( Southern California Christian ) , Layne Mosler ( Troy ) and Heather Lee ( Villa Park ) .