The middle-aged white woman in the David Duke sweat shirt was pleasantly enthusiastic . `` He 's for fair play for all , '' she said of the former Ku Klux Klan leader she had come to hear . `` Right now it 's like we 've become the minority and we need someone to do something . '' Duke , who has made the jump from radical fringe to elected official , points to such people as proof that his message is becoming acceptable to the mainstream . Now leader of the National Assn . for the Advancement of White People , Duke won election to the Louisiana Legislature by talking about the high birth rate among unwed women on welfare and claiming that whites are victimized by civil rights laws . `` I think I spoke out loud what a lot of people say around the dinner table , '' he said . `` People were so impressed by the ideas that they voted for me despite the controversy of my background . '' Foes See It , Too Duke is not alone in his thinking . Much of what he says is echoed by those who have opposed him throughout his career . `` The David Duke election was a signal of a sour mood of resentment on the part of some whites that has been a long time in developing , '' said Irwin Suall , director of fact-finding for the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith . `` There is a perception out there that blacks are being favored at the expense of whites , not merely in employment , but in status in the media . '' Some dismiss Duke 's election by just 200 votes as an anomaly ; his suburban New Orleans district is 99 % white . But Suall and other trackers of racial tension believe that disparate events , such as Duke 's slim victory at the polls and the rise of the racist skinhead subculture , are warning signs to be taken seriously . `` These people and these events represent something larger , '' said Chip Berlet , a researcher for Political Research Associates of Cambridge , Mass . `` They are like the canaries in mines -- telling us there is an undercurrent of people that are very unhappy . '' White Complaints This unhappiness , Berlet and others say , runs long and deep . It is the result of economic changes that have nibbled away at the blue-collar , union-wage culture , of fear of drugs and crime , of the perception that affirmative action and other civil rights programs are unfair to whites , and of a general hopelessness within the white working class , which sees its power in society shrinking . At a shopping mall on the edge of Duke 's district , a white woman in her 30s offered her opinion but would not give her name : '' You see all this about black power and black pride and helping blacks economically , and I guess that started out with good intentions . But it 's not right when whites lose jobs and it 's not fair when you 're called a racist for complaining about it . '' It is difficult to measure this mood . Most polls show the American public as far more tolerant of racial differences and integration programs than it once was . But Michael McKeon , a pollster who has worked with the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee , said standard surveys that ask yes-or-no questions ca n't plumb the depths of individual attitudes . 'Disenchantment ' Noted McKeon said his phone surveys , which involve conversation with the respondents , show `` big-time disenchantment . '' `` It 's nothing you can put a number on , but there is a resentment out there that the lower middle class , and their children , are n't going to be any better off than they were , '' he said . `` If you ask , 'Are you mad because your kid did n't get a scholarship and a black kid did ? ' they 're going to say no . But if you talk to them you 're going to see this resentment woven into the fabric of their thoughts . '' Those in the civil rights trenches , such as Curt Koehler , an organizer for the Chicago Commission on Human Relations , note a simmering anger , especially among young whites . `` A growing number of white people in their 20s feel they are on the short end of the stick , '' said Koehler , who tries to defuse racial tension in the blue-collar neighborhoods on Chicago 's Southwest side , an area that has seen KKK rallies and skinhead violence . Koehler said the lower-middle-class white bastion of the secure union job is crumbling . At the same time , the disenchanted see a growing black middle class moving in , and believe it is the result of government favoritism . Blacks Get Blame '' A black on his way up might have a chance to buy a home in a neighborhood where a young white kid just saw his job leave , '' he said . `` The anger is being placed now on black folks and affirmative action . '' Beyond the economics is an issue of group identity and pride . The higher profile of minorities on stage , in the movies and on television gives some whites a sense that their importance in society is diminishing . Berlet noted that while relatively few blacks appear on TV , those few have appeared so rapidly that black representation can seem disproportional . `` Blacks make up 15 % of the population and maybe only 4 % on TV , '' he said , `` but when some whites see . . . more black faces on television , they think they 're taking over . '' Gregg , a 20-year-old Atlanta skinhead who would not give his last name , complained bitterly about `` black propaganda . '' `` I was watching television and they had these blacks sitting around , telling everybody it was blacks who invented this and blacks who invented that . It was a bunch of lies , '' he said . Skinhead 's Viewpoint Bert , a fellow skinhead , sees concepts such as black pride and black history as coming at the expense of white identity . `` White heritage is not being taught in school . It 's like you 're supposed to be ashamed of being white while they 're teaching black heritage full force , '' he said . `` They completely downplay the role whites have in this country . '' These frustrations can blossom into acts of racial violence that Koehler has seen in his Chicago neighborhoods . `` Or , '' he said , `` these people can vote for a David Duke in the belief they can protect what is mine . '' Whether that will mean election of others who espouse similar ideas is a matter of debate among social pulse-takers . Martin Lipset , a Stanford University sociologist , said he believes that other white-rights candidates may be elected to local offices , `` but they 're dead if they have any ambitions to go further . '' Duke , however , believes that he is only the first to tap a growing sentiment . Duke Sees a Trend '' I think that this is the beginning of a time when we will see candidates discuss these things , '' he said . `` A candidate who does n't have to carry the political baggage I had to carry , and who discusses these issues , will win . '' Duke was elected after several unsuccessful attempts . In 1979 he ran for state Senate and lost . He topped two other candidates but ran a distant second with 30 % of the vote . The differences between then and now , says Duke , are the sophistication of his organization and a change in the mood of the voters . `` There has been a tremendous shift in the last few years , '' he said . `` I think there is a majority of whites that is starting to say we have rights , too , that we have a heritage that is worthy of preservation and we do n't want to face racial discrimination . '' Sam Altobello , registrar of voters in Jefferson Parish for 18 years , said Duke 's message hit such a responsive chord that people outside his district called to see if they could register there so they could vote for him . `` He got his message over , '' said Altobello . `` He was saying things that people have been thinking for a while . He said it , and it went over . '' White Power Campaigns Whether Duke 's rhetoric and its success will carry over in other parts of the country remains to be seen . Several groups with KKK or neo-Nazi ties have announced plans to field candidates . Duke says he has been contacted by more than 200 candidates or elected officials interested in his campaign . `` I think the radical people are going to be getting more votes in this country . The shrinking middle class sees those in power have nothing left to offer , '' said Tom Metzger , the former Klan leader who heads the separatist White Ayran Resistance , which has courted the skinheads .