On June 2 , 1925 , Wally Pipp had a headache and was replaced at first base in the New York Yankee lineup by a quiet hometown kid named Lou Gehrig . It took 14 years , 2,130 games and an incurable illness to put Gehrig back on the bench . And when the Iron Horse took himself out of the lineup 50 years ago , on May 2 , 1939 , he also moved out of the shadow of Babe Ruth and into baseball immortality . The shy son of German immigrants living on New York 's East Side never captured the imagination of the public the way the flamboyant Ruth did , but when his remarkable consecutive-game streak ended he took with him numbers comparable to anyone who ever played the game : -- 493 lifetime homers . -- 1,990 RBIs . -- A .632 slugging percentage . -- A major-league record 23 grand slams . -- Four home runs in a game . -- In 1927 , he hit .373 with 47 home runs and 175 runs batted in . He also had 52 doubles , 18 triples , walked 109 times and scored 149 runs . Yet it was a season lost to Ruth 's 60 home runs . -- In the 13 full seasons he played , Gehrig averaged 147 RBIs a season . Henry Aaron , Willie Mays and Mickey Mantle never drove in that many runs in a seeason even once . -- In four seasons during the peak of his career he averaged only 37 strikeouts a year . Reggie Jackson averaged 129 strikeouts a season for his career . But it is his 2,130 consecutive games played that is considered one of baseball 's unbreakable records . The next best is the mark Gehrig broke -- 1,307 straight games by Everett Scott , 823 games ( more than five seasons ) short of Gehrig 's mark . If a rookie was to start a consecutive-game streak in 1989 , he would have to play every game from now until early in the season of 2,002 to surpass Gehrig . Since 1939 , no one has even come close . Steve Garvey holds the National League record with 1,207 consecutive games from Sept. 3 , 1975 , to July 29 , 1983 . Garvey retired after the 1987 season , but if he had kept the streak going in 1983 and was playing today , he would still be a few games short . `` I do n't think anyone will ever break Lou Gehrig 's record , '' Garvey said . `` I know I played with a lot of nagging injuries to keep the streak alive and I did n't even get close . '' Baltimore shortstop Cal Ripken recently surpassed playing in 1,100 consecutive games . He would still need another six-plus seasons to reach Gehrig . `` It 's not really something I 'm thinking about , '' Ripken said . `` I ca n't even imagine reaching that point . Hey , I 'm surprised I 've gotten this far . `` I just play one game at a time . '' A star at Columbia University , Gehrig was scouted by Paul Krichell and signed with the Yankees when offered a $ 1,500 bonus . After two short stints with New York in 1923 and 1924 , Gehrig started his streak on that June day in 1925 when Pipp , who had been the Yankees ' first baseman since 1915 , told Manager Miller Huggins he had a headache and asked to take the day off . Gehrig took over at first base , and stayed there for 15 years . He stayed through muscle pulls , broken bones , and yes , even a slump or two . Gehrig turned 35 in 1938 and his average slipped to .295 with 29 homers and 114 RBIs . While million-dollar numbers by today 's standards , it was far below his norm and provoked concern for Gehrig and the Yankees . Gehrig , whose top salary was $ 39,000 , had a sluggish spring training in 1939 and a routine play at Yankee Stadium in April told him something was wrong . A ball was hit back to pitcher Johnny Murphy and Gehrig had trouble getting to the bag . Murphy told the Iron Horse , `` nice play , '' but Gehrig knew it was nothing special . In his first 28 at-bats in 1939 , Gehrig had four hits with no homers and one RBI . Gehrig knew something was wrong , he just did n't know what . May 1 , 1939 , was an off day and Gehrig spent some lonely hours in a Detroit hotel room . The next day , Gehrig told Manager Joe McCarthy : `` I 'm taking myself out of the lineup . '' `` I decided last Sunday night on this move , '' Gehrig said in announcing his decision to the press . `` I have n't been a bit of good to the team since the season started . It would not be fair to the boys , to Joe or to the baseball public for me to try going on . In fact , it would not be fair to myself . '' McCarthy thought Gehrig just needed some much deserved time off and would be back soon . `` I told him it would be as he wished , '' McCarthy said at the time . `` Like everybody else I 'm sorry to see it happen . I told him not to worry . Maybe the warm weather will bring him around . '' But the weather had nothing to do with Gehrig 's problems . He visited the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota , and it was discovered he had an incurable disease . He was diagnosed as having Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis . But the world has come to know it as Lou Gehrig 's disease . `` I was there , '' said former Yankees broadcaster Mel Allen . `` But sometimes it does n't seem real now . There was a real Lou Gehrig . A guy who joked with his teammates and argued at bad calls . `` But after his last game , he became a legend . '' Others have had great numbers , but few more impact on the game of baseball . `` I remember the first time I played first base at Yankee Stadium thinking I was in the same place Lou Gehrig played , '' first baseman Don Mattingly said . `` It almost gave me chills . '' Yankee Stadium is the `` House that Ruth Built , '' but as long as a team plays there , Gehrig will be the pride of the Yankees . Said Allen , `` He 's what made wearing a Yankee uniform special . ''