The validity of so-called `` genetic fingerprinting '' went on trial here Monday as Orange County prosecutors sought to become the first in California to use a criminal suspect 's genetic makeup as evidence in court . `` It 's very clear that individuals are genetically unique , '' Dr. Oliver A. Ryder , a scientist with the San Diego Zoo , testified at a hearing on the admissibility of genetic evidence in criminal proceedings . But in more than three hours of intense questioning , the defense attorney for Danny Harris , accused of 46 counts of rape , sexual molestation and burglary , sought to refute that theory by showing potential inaccuracies in the testing and interpretation of DNA ( deoxyribonucleic acid ) . The hearing was the first in Orange County to explore controversial legal questions surrounding genetic fingerprinting -- a new practice seen as a scientific boon by prosecutors and a dangerous and unreliable precedent by defense attorneys . 2nd Round of Testimony Lawyers in the Harris case are to return July 24 to begin a second round of testimony before Superior Court Judge William R. Froeberg . The judge ultimately must decide whether prosecutors can offer at Harris ' upcoming trial genetic evidence that purportedly links the 39-year-old Buena Park man to about 18 rapes and a series of other violent crimes around the county . First devised in England four years ago , the process of genetic fingerprinting uses samples of blood , semen or body tissue to establish an individual 's genetic code or DNA pattern , a blueprint for all living organisms . Backers of the process maintain that , with the exception of identical twins , each individual has a unique genetic pattern . Genetic fingerprinting , considered by prosecutors more reliable and readily available than standard fingerprints in identifying perpetrators of sexual assaults and violent crimes , has gained only limited acceptance in a few courts around the nation . And it has never been allowed into evidence in California . But backed by a strong endorsement in January from state Atty . Gen. John K. Van de Kamp , local prosecutors in Orange , Ventura and Alameda counties all now are seeking to introduce genetic evidence in pending criminal cases , according to Orange County Deputy Dist . Atty . Dennis D. Bauer . `` If we 're successful in this ( Harris ) case in getting ( genetic fingerprinting ) into evidence , it 'll certainly make it that much easier the next time around , '' said Bauer , explaining the precedent-setting importance of the case . Indeed , the Orange County Sheriff-Coroner 's Department already is making plans to set up its own genetic fingerprinting laboratory . Only four now exist in the country . ' A Tremendous Tool ' Larry Ragle , director of forensic sciences , said Monday that the Sheriff 's Department department has now raised about $ 45,000 from the private sector for the project . That is far short of the $ 200,000 needed to start the lab by the end of the year , but Ragle said he is hopeful that the Board of Supervisors may approve additional funding next month . `` This ( genetic fingerprinting ) would be a tremendous tool for us to have in our investigations , '' Ragle said in an interview . In the meantime , however , county officials face stiff opposition from some members of the scientific and legal defense communities who assert that prosecutors are trying to rush an unreliable process into action . At Monday 's hearing in the Harris case , defense attorney John D. Barnett sought to show that the genetic fingerprinting process is riddled with the potential for erroneous results . He also challenged the ability of Dr. Ryder -- a vertebrate geneticist who has worked extensively with DNA testing in studying wildlife at the San Diego Zoo but is not a forensic scientist -- to testify adequately on the subject . Assessing Ryder 's testimony , Barnett said later : `` There 's simply insufficient scientific agreement on the ability of life codes to predict matches ( between a genetic pattern and an individual ) . . . These life codes are still under tremendous scrutiny . And right now , there 's just too big a risk to take in a criminal case . '' Prosecutor Bauer acknowledged that , without the aid of the DNA evidence , he would be significantly hampered in trying to prove to a jury that Harris was responsible for a series of violent assaults in Anaheim , Fullerton , Santa Ana and Garden Grove dating back to 1985 . Bauer would not elaborate on the genetic evidence in the Harris case . But Barnett said prosecutors have already indicated they plan to introduce semen specimens , which they claim conclusively tie Harris to at least five of the 18 rapes for which he is charged .