Victor Yingst is on the trail of a killer on Florida 's palm-shaded Gulf coast . He knows the stalker 's methods by heart . `` First the coconuts fall , then the fronds turn a bright yellow and soon the tree is dead , '' said Yingst , who has spent more than three years battling lethal yellowing disease for the Lee County Extension Service . After wiping out thousands of palms in the Caribbean and southeastern Florida , the infestation is spreading into one of the last untouched regions for the majestic Jamaican tall palm and other susceptible exotic species . The insect-carried disease -- moving inland from beaches -- has agriculture experts fearing a recurrence of the palm die-offs in southern Florida in the 1970s . Tourism officials worry about a change in the tropical appeal of southeastern Florida . `` Lethal yellowing is sort of like a fire , '' Yingst said . `` If left unchecked , it will spread farther and farther . It could really rob this area of its special beauty . '' Although lethal yellowing has been studied for nearly 100 years , there is no known cure . But recently tree inoculations and plantings of resistant palms have helped somewhat to contain the disease , caused by a cellular organism called mycoplasmas that lives on the palm fronds ' soft core . Trees usually die within three to six months after the first symptoms appear . The earliest known reference to a coconut tree disorder was made in 1834 on Grand Cayman Island . By the late 19th Century , scientists were examining lethal yellowing in Jamaica , where the coconut crop was a valuable export . Lethal yellowing jumped over to the Florida Keys in the 1950s and moved onto the mainland near Miami in 1971 . Currently , the disease has claimed about 200,000 coconut palms and nearly 100,000 other species in Florida as far north as Jupiter , about 80 miles from Miami , according to the University of Florida . In Texas , lethal yellowing has spread to date palms , creating concern in the date-growing regions of Arizona and California . Overseas , the disease ranges from West Africa across the Caribbean to Mexico 's Yucatan peninsula . `` What you 're left with is a trunk -- like a telephone pole -- that just rots until it eventually falls over . It 's really ugly , '' Yingst said . As head of the Lee County lethal yellowing control effort , Yingst has organized groups of residents and landscapers to monitor its progress and inject healthy trees with a tetracycline-based antibiotic . Also , resistant palms such as the popular malayan dwarf variety are being planted around healthy coconut palms as a buffer . Sherry Marinello , who operates a landscaping service , said she has inoculated about 1,300 trees in Ft. Myers and Ft. Myers Beach , where the disease was first spotted on the Gulf Coast . `` To see a picture of what this place looked like two years ago and what it looks like now would shock you , '' she said . `` It 's a serious problem that could really change the character of this place if it 's not stopped . ''