Putting aside waffle-stompers for now , next Sunday 's Earth Day has had at least one significant impact on the American wilderness since it was first observed 20 years ago . When I started wandering the Sierra in the 1960s , non-ever-decomposable filter cigarette butts littered every trail . As an embarrassed smoker myself , I started pocketing them as I hiked along . Then I began carrying little plastic bags to hold the foul things . A hike of just a few hours would fill the bag . Sometimes it seemed I was doomed to trek behind a whole crew of Humphrey Bogarts . There 's been a dramatic change . It 's rare to find a discarded cigarette butt these days , even along the most popular Sierra trails . That 's one small triumph for the wilderness , as well as for humankind . The wilderness did not become fashionable April 22 , 1970 . When I first started visiting the Sierra backcountry , some of the popular areas were already overrun and abused . The most heavily traveled regions , naturally , were those close to access roads , requiring little physical effort or determination to reach . But there was Stall 's Law covering people , cigarette butts , orange peels , beer cans in streams , giant logs hauled across campfires and left barely singed , live trees denuded by hand axes or anything else : The opportunity for a pleasant wilderness experience increased in direct , accelerating proportion to the square of the distance to the nearest road . The farther from the road , the more likely wilderness really would be wilderness . And people who had made the effort to get that far were more likely to be real wilderness people who would treat the backcountry gently and with respect . In those days , only a few people wore boots with the lugged Vibram sole . Come across a Vibram track in the trail and chances were it belonged to some climbing friend or acquaintance , or a friend of a friend . Wilderness lovers did not wear badges of distinction on their sleeves . Their badge was that cluster of lugs and the bright little yellow Vibram brand label just under the instep . There were other trademarks , though . Real wilderness travelers always had a baggy down jacket and a parka -- what the mountaineers used to call an anarok -- usually in bright orange . This color , now found mostly on life jackets , was supposed to be visible in case of a search and rescue . If you wanted to be saved , you did not want to look like a rock . To be with it , you referred to your down jacket as a duvet , the French mountaineer 's term . Serious wilderness people shunned the lowly but versatile poncho . Ponchos could be bought at Wards and were really no protection against sustained rain with their yawning gaps between snaps . A real mountain person , before the Gore-Tex revolution , had a cagoule , which literally was `` monk 's cloak '' and actually was a long anarok . Unlike the well-ventilated poncho , this all-embracing waterproof garment created an instant sauna under any amount of exertion . Rarely did my friends and I ever get caught out overnight up among the peaks , but just in case , we had to have a cagoule for the bivouac . Pre-Earth Day people like me finally became too embarrassed to wear army boots into the wilderness and got real hiking footwear , usually from REI in Seattle by mail order . The old eight-pound pup tent ( 20 pounds wet ) gave way to the new nylon A-frames made by outfits like Sierra Design and North Face . So , too , with the lumpy old olive-drab , duck-feather surplus bag . The problem was going into the wilderness with everything looking too new . Some rumpled veteran passing on the trail would grunt a friendly hello , but you knew the stranger was sneering inwardly at this tenderfoot with all that new-fangled gear . You had to give the new equipment that broken-in look as soon as possible . Some of my friends were even known to rub dirt and pebbles on a new pack to give it a healthy used look . But then came Woodstock , Earth Day and all that ecological awareness . Almost overnight , everyone was wearing boots with Vibram soles , some that never touched granite or good trail dirt outside of Westwood or Berkeley . Worse yet , they called them `` waffle-stompers . '' Why not , at least , gaufre le bruit lourd ? College campuses blossomed into a riot of down jackets . The Sierra Design 60/40 Mountain Parka became a trademark of not just the wilderness but of antiwar rallies and coffee shops . My generation got waffle-stomped . For a while , we let our stuff get as worn and tattered as possible so anyone could see at a glance that we were not latter-day Sierra Nevadans . We slung our Perlon ropes and slings of climbing hardware casually over shoulders , whether we were going climbing or not . We abandoned international orange for natural colors that blended into the mountains -- greens , blues , tans . Before long , their stuff was just as tattered . Their hair and beards were longer . Their parkas just as tan , or even rust . They took up rock climbing and did better at it . They had become us and there were too many of us . In 1973 the U.S. Forest Service began restricting access to the wilderness for the first time , setting quotas during the summer season on the Mt . Whitney trail . Thousands apply yearly for trail passes ; many have to settle for an alternate trail or try again next year . The Whitney Trail corridor , if not recovered , at least is being protected from heavier damage . There are few complaints , says Charlie Robinson , a ranger at Lone Pine . `` The people believe in the system , '' he added , but noted that thoughtless dayhikers are still prone to leave behind bags of unused charcoal briquettes after picnics at Lone Pine Lake . Even the waffle-stomper is out of style these days with wilderness purists , who argue that the heavy lugs unnecessarily damage trails and meadows . Fashionable backpacking footwear now is more like a running shoe , with a thin , unlugged sole . I now have not one , but two pairs of these shoes . And a new down jacket from Patagonia , the most haute of American outdoors haute couture . It 's blue . It is also obviously new , but after it gets mussed up a bit and perhaps has a couple tears mended with duct tape , it 'll be just fine .