There are times in life when nothing but a 24-hour coffee shop will do . I remember having to work the late shift at one job I had : I left at 2 or 3 in the morning , too wound up to go to sleep . Only breakfast would help . After all , nothing lulls the brain to slumber like a pound of glutinous biscuits and gravy . In my younger days , I 'd drink and dance with friends until club closing time ; then , knowing that a big plate of steak and eggs is excellent hangover prevention , we 'd head out to an all-night truck stop or diner . And there were times driving across country when we 'd get on a roll and would n't want to stop , when we kept driving through the wee hours , when we had to stop to tank up on gas , coffee and maybe a sweet roll . In such circumstances , nothing , nothing , but a 24-hour place will do . I have n't worked until morning , danced until closing or driven all night lately , but I do know exactly which 24-hour place to run to : Big Jim 's Family Style Restaurant in Sun Valley . Big Jim 's is n't all that conceptually different from Denny 's or Bob 's . There 's a salad bar , and breakfast served any time you want it . But this is one man 's -- Big Jim 's -- version of a chain restaurant , and thus , one of a kind . The colors throughout the restaurant are those of a deep Western sunset : deep yellow , pearly orange , a haunting lavender and sky blue , the same colors that appear in the Western paintings of frontiersmen that hang on Big Jim 's walls . Overhead , in a long trough in the ceiling , Monument Valley is airbrushed . ( Looking up into that trough of mesas and heady blue sky is dizzying . ) There are wagon-wheel chandeliers , etched glass and a long , fully stocked aquarium separating the booths . ( Every now and then , an algae-eating vacuum-mouthed plecostomus would come by and suck on the glass inches from my face . ) From my very first visit , I realized that this restaurant is not called Big Jim 's for nothing . We went for breakfast . My friend ordered steak and eggs , which came with three eggs , a big T-bone and great , freshly made hash browns : The food literally hung off the sides of the plate . The T-bone was decent , too , grilled over mesquite . My Belgian waffles were perfect , light and crunchy . I ordered melon and was given an entire half of a honeydew , and not a diminutive honeydew , either , but a honeydew larger than my head . `` Were all the melons this large ? '' I asked the waitress . `` No , I picked through and found that one for you . '' As it happened , this waitress was the kind of waitress songs are written about . She took care of us and brought us food , water , coffee . She emptied cooled cups of coffee and returned them steaming . She checked in on us , looked us in the eye , anticipated our needs . There is no staunching the amount of food that comes out of the kitchen to the table at Big Jim 's . An English muffin is really a muffin and a half . A fresh spinach omelet could provide minimum daily requirement of protein and iron to three grown men . A club sandwich is so large it becomes an eating problem : How and where does one get this stratigraphic mass of turkey , bacon , bread , cheese , lettuce and tomato into the mouth ? Such abundance is , in ways , psychologically satisfying ; it 's getting more , more , more than I ever wanted . After a particularly stressful morning , a late breakfast at Big Jim 's is full of customers who clearly clean their plates on a regular basis -- big customers . Compared with breakfast and lunch , dinner at Big Jim 's is a disappointment . If this is , as the menu proclaims , `` good ol ' Western homemade cookin , ' `` it does n't speak well of Western homes . Rather , I 'd call it no-nonsense truck-stop-style food . Pork chops were small and cooked until leathery ; meat loaf , though spicy , was a textural washout . The so-called fresh vegetables were no doubt fresh once , but the ones I got had grown watery and faded from their extended life on the steam table . Dinner comes with baskets of neon orange garlic bread , and a trip to the salad bar . I do n't make a practice of eating at salad bars ; quite the opposite , in fact . But one mouthful of a Big Jim 's salad , eaten under that 3-D mural of blue sky and red rock formations , somehow gave me a series of ricocheting memories . It brought back all the times I 've eaten in a coffee shop while trying to diet , of the various waitress jobs I held in four different states , of cross-country drives during which , crazed for something fresh and green , I 'd devour just such a salad . I would n't make a habit of Big Jim 's salad bar , but one night , I liked it . In general , Big Jim 's food is utterly generic and familiar , which to many people brings its own form of pleasure . And where else can you have a trough full of Monument Valley over your head , a plecostomus kissing the glass by your face , and one of the world 's sweetest waitresses filling your coffee cup ? Big Jim 's Family Restaurant 8950 Laurel Canyon Blvd. , Sun Valley ; ( 818 ) 768-0213 . Open 24 hours daily . Beer and wine . Parking in lot . Banquet facilities . MasterCard , Visa ( for purchases of more than $ 10 ) . Meal for two , food only , $ 6 to $ 25 . Suggested dishes : T-bone steak and eggs , $ 9.39 ; Belgian waffles , $ 2.59 ; most breakfast items , $ 2.29- $ 9.39 .