When Cal Ripken Jr. goes into a slump , no one in the Baltimore Orioles organization goes into a funk . When he goes on a tear , no one leaps into the air . That is called confidence in a professional , no matter which way the winds are blowing . Ripken has reached that status accorded players whose season-long numbers are almost taken for granted , a testimony to their proven worth . So it is at the moment with the Oriole shortstop , who entered Tuesday night 's game with a .390 batting average in his last 15 games but with no home runs in nearly a month . Neither figure is eliciting much of a reaction . `` We 're not concerned about the home runs , '' Manager Frank Robinson said . `` They 're just a matter of hitting under the ball another quarter of an inch . `` The main thing is that Cal is hitting the ball hard . The rest of it takes care of itself . '' Ripken is coming off a series in which he went 6 for 13 ( .461 ) against Seattle and knocked in four runs in three games . He also had consecutive multi-hit games against the Mariners . `` I 'm driving and stinging the ball , '' he said . `` If you consistently do that , the home runs will come . It 's just the result of seeing the ball and hitting it hard with a good swing . `` There 's nothing to be worried about . I 'd be more concerned if I was hitting home runs and not getting any other hits . '' Ripken said he felt no added pressure to go deep now that he had supplanted Eddie Murray as the team 's cleanup hitter . `` At times through 162 games , you get streaks when you hit home run after home run . And other times , you just do n't , '' he said . `` But I know if you have the ability to do it , somehow it will work out . '' As with Murray before him , Ripken has been a consistent power hitter , collecting between 23 and 28 homers in each of his seven full seasons . He is only the second shortstop ( Ernie Banks is the other ) to accomplish that feat . But last season , he hit only one in his final 33 games ( including a string of 29 straight without one ) and , after hitting two in the first week this season ( off Roger Clemens and Frank Viola ) , he has gone homerless since April 9 . `` The guy 's track record speaks for itself , '' Orioles hitting coach Tom McCraw said . `` He knows what he wants to do . Guys like him and Phil Bradley , you just give them the vehicle and they adjust and get ready . `` Rip is hitting the ball hard . The home runs follow . Just pencil him in the lineup and do n't worry about him . '' Ripken began the season with a new batting stance , then went back to the old version after going 4 for 36 ( .111 ) . Over the next 10 games , he batted .447 ( 17 for 38 ) and has remained hot . `` I do n't want to analyze about the stance , '' he said . `` You can think too much and get all messed up . ''