Why could n't Donald Trump quit while he was ahead ? He already owned Trump 's Castle , Trump Tower , Trump Plaza and Trump Parc , and all of them `` great deals , '' so what did he need with the disastrous Taj Mahal of Debt ? Why build another casino ? For that matter , why write another book ? But , alas , he did write another book , `` Trump : Surviving at the Top , '' which is another kind of great deal , ranking right up there with `` Vanna Speaks . '' It came out in New York the very week that Trump 's lenders in New Jersey were working overtime to stave off the imminent bankruptcy of the great `` survivor of success '' himself , now saddled with the Taj Majal of Debt . The title alone , `` Surviving at the Top , '' is so perversely marvelous that there ought to be a contest to invent others that could equal it . Here are a few candidates : Marie Antoinette 's `` Keeping My Head , '' Achilles ' `` Recovering From a Hamstring Injury , '' Gen. Custer 's `` Outfoxing the Enemy '' and Jean Claude Duvalier 's `` President for Life . '' Have you seen the cover ? There 's the celestial Trump , floating in the clouds like a Tiepolo angel and flipping an apple into the air . The apple is supposed to represent New York , so you get the idea that Trump has New York in the palm of his hand , and the expression on his face says : `` I 've made it , you schmucks , and too bad about you . '' Compare this celestial Trump on the cover of the new book to the one on the cover of the first book -- `` Trump : The Art of the Deal '' -- where the man appears to be sitting in a window , slightly elevated but within sight of the ground -- and you realize how far Trump has risen in his own estimation , even in the short space of three years . Compare the text of the new book to that of the old ( there 's a different ghostwriter this time ) and you 'll notice an obvious increase in the employment of flattering adjectives , such as : `` dazzling trophy '' ( Trump 's yacht ) , `` fabulous structure '' ( his Plaza hotel ) , `` marvelous facility '' ( a Trump casino ) , `` jewel-encrusted casino '' ( another Trump plaything ) , `` the magnificent Taj Mahal '' ( the Trump Taj Mahal ) , the `` best airline of its kind '' ( the Trump shuttle ) , `` adoring crowds , '' `` huge talent '' and `` celebrity-studded events . '' Under the circumstances , the Trump books have a definite new appeal in the humor category , which is how I would market them if I were Random House or Warner , right alongside Dave Barry . Throughout , there are funny quotes , such as : `` Bankers now come to me to ask if I might be interested in borrowing their money . They know a safe bet '' ; or `` I 'm going to be building when everybody else has gone bust '' ; or Trump 's advice to Mike Tyson : `` Stay out of investments in real- estate deals and tax shelters . '' Another rewarding way to read Trump is to study both volumes simultaneously . This , I found , gives many clues as to what has happened to Trump to drive him toward insolvency . In Trump 's initial memoir from three years ago , he was nearly all business : haggling , niggling , finding the good deals that would make him rich . In the photo section of the first book , there are two pages of Trump appearing with various `` hot people , '' such as Herschel Walker and the Reagans , but seven pages of Trump 's marvelous buildings . This more or less indicates where Trump 's priorities lay : seven-to-two , assets over celebrities . In `` Surviving at the Top , '' photos of Trump buildings have been reduced to three pages , while there are 10 pages of him standing with Hulk Hogan , the Muppets , Michael Jackson , Don Johnson , George Bush , Sugar Ray Leonard , Benazir Bhutto , Mike Wallace and Mike Tyson , whom Trump describes as `` more than just a great boxer . . . one of the most talked-about people in the world . '' Judging by the photo ratio , you begin to suspect that keeping up with investments has not been as interesting to Trump as keeping up with talked-about people , which seems to have become the man 's real full-time job . Should Trump personally welcome Kitty Dukakis to the Plaza Hotel ? Should he retaliate against a major designer , whom he once helped with a substance-abuse problem and who has snubbed Trump 's latest fashion show ? Should he lend his helicopter to the Duchess of York ? Should he refuse to shake Mick Jagger 's hand after Jagger has hogged a press conference at one of Trump 's casinos ? Should he let Time magazine put him on the cover ? Should he tolerate Frank Sinatra 's boorish behavior at a nightclub ? These are only a few of the many social issues that demand Trump 's attention in `` Surviving at the Top . '' `` Fame is a kind of drug , '' he observes , `` one that is way too powerful for most people to handle . '' You ca n't doubt that he 's been handling it full-time after you 've read Chapter 4 , entitled `` Life at the Top , '' where we 're let in on the challenges of Trump 's schedule . Several days of it are excerpted here : 9 a.m . Learns that he will be honored at a Police Athletic League dinner . 10:30 . Takes call from Debbie Allen , the dancer and singer , who is in the beauty parlor . Discusses how much they both enjoyed serving as judges for the Miss America Pageant in Atlantic City . 12 noon . Ponders the news that a Bronx borough chairman has been sentenced in Connecticut to 12 years in prison for taking kickbacks . 2:00 p.m. Takes call from a friend who works on a magazine , complaining about the magazine . 3:30 p.m. Is handed a letter from Barbara Bush , telling him he was wonderful on the Phil Donahue show . 8:00 p.m . Heads for the CNN studios to do an interview with the `` great interviewer '' Larry King . 9:00 a.m. Ponders the fact that Larry Hagman , star of TV series Dallas , does n't like replacement tiles that were put in his bathroom of his apartment at Trump Tower . Decides to remove the off-white and give Hagman the tan . 11:00 a.m. Off to LaGuardia Airport where Trump plane waits to take him to Palm Beach . Upset to discover that the management company has hired him a new pilot . 8:30 a.m. Chats with `` greatest sailor in the world '' Dennis Connor , about a new publicity scheme : yacht races off the coast of Atlantic City . Offers Connor a commission if he can find a buyer for Trump 's marvelous yacht . Is thinking of building a bigger one . 10:30 a.m. With management company , discusses pilot situation . 3 p.m . Walks down Fifth Avenue . Wonders if he should call latest book `` Everybody Hates a Winner . '' 6:00 p.m. Takes call from person he barely knows to argue that Garry Trudeau , author of Doonesbury , `` lacks talent '' and `` is n't funny . '' 9 a.m. Gets a nice letter from Helen Gurley Brown asking if he 'll pose for a centerfold in Cosmopolitan magazine . 11:30 a.m . Meets with architects to talk about restoring the ballroom at the Plaza . Wants to regild the moldings with real gold . 2:00 p.m . Wonders if he should hire a personal trainer . 4:00 p.m. A deal is cooking . 7:30 p.m. Has dinner at Le Cirque `` one of New York 's hottest and most exclusive restaurants . '' Runs into Richard Nixon there . Trump does n't even bother to describe the deal that was cooking at 4 p.m. As a matter of fact , there 's no hint that he 's thought about the casino business , nor the hotel business ( except for the re-gilding at the Plaza ) , for at least 72 hours . Is it any surprise that Trump did n't even realize he was no longer worth a billion dollars ? I base that conclusion on the fact that Trump is infuriated that Forbes magazine dared to print the ugly rumor that he was n't worth a billion dollars . This bothered him more than anything said about his sex life in the tabloids . ( Actually , he seems rather to enjoy what 's said about him in the tabloids -- `` I 've never had any trouble in bed , '' he cannily discloses . ) When Forbes spread the vicious gossip about his net worth , he had to retaliate : '' Sometimes , journalistic attacks have little to do with the pursuit of truth . The cover story Forbes magazine did on me in its May 14 , 1990 , issue is a case in point . HOW MUCH IS DONALD TRUMP WORTH ? the headline asked . The answer , according to Forbes , was about $ 500 million -- or much LESS than the $ 1.7 billion the magazine said I was worth a year before . . . . `` Forbes , in my opinion , undervalued such possessions of mine as , among others , the Plaza Hotel , the Trump Shuttle and seventy-eight acres of land I own on Manhattan 's Upper West Side . Who can say what these one-of-a-kind assets are worth until they 're put on the market ? Certainly not a mediocre reporter from Forbes named Richard Stern . . . . '' After having put Stern in his place , Trump goes on to speculate that the late Malcolm Forbes was personally out to get him on account of : ( 1 ) yacht envy , the magnificent Trump Princess measuring 282 feet to Forbes ' relatively paltry 150 feet ; ( 2 ) an incident at the Oak Room Bar in the Plaza Hotel , when Forbes ' underaged guest was refused a seat by the management . Now , just as all of this is appearing in print , the truth that Trump was trying to suppress has come out : The Forbes estimate of Trump 's net worth was , if anything , generous . Trump is a walking Brazil . He ca n't pay the interest on his loans , and he might be worth less than you and me , less than the New England banks , less even than ousted Canadian CEO Robert Campeau . It may turn out to be worse than the accountants think , since they already have counted as an asset the $ 1 million in royalties that Trump expects to make from `` Surviving at the Top . '' So do n't think of this as a book purchase . Think of it as a charitable contribution .