Consumers will benefit in the long run from food manufacturers ' efforts to make and promote healthier processed food , says Molly Gee , chief dietitian at Houston 's Institute for Preventive Medicine at the Methodist Hospital . Still , she advises consumers to look beyond the promotions and read labels carefully . Gee , a spokeswoman for the American Dietetic Assn. , and other health experts also caution consumers to view food ingredients in the context of their total dietary goals and in the context of their life style . A person who eats mostly home-cooked , balanced meals made from unprocessed foods , Gee says , probably should n't be too concerned about a little tropical oil in an occasional snack . The Food and Drug Administration requires food processors to list ingredients and the amount of sodium on the label , but they do not have to list nutritional information unless they have added a nutrient to the food or are making a nutritional claim about the product . For example , milk cartons carry a complete label because Vitamins A & D are added nutrients . In practice , many processors voluntarily provide complete nutritional information , resulting in about 55 % of packaged foods with comprehensive labels , according to FDA surveys . Manufacturers may provide general descriptions of colorings and flavorings , but yellow dye No . 5 must be listed specifically to warn people with allergic reactions . The comprehensive label consists of three basic parts : * The amount of calories , protein , fat , carbohydrates and sodium per serving . * The percentage of the recommended daily allowance of certain nutrients . * The ingredients . The ingredient that represents the most weight in the package would must be listed first , with other ingredients following in descending order . For example , if there are 8 ounces of beans in a 12-ounce can , beans would be listed first . Keep Guidelines in Mind The FDA is considering regulations that would more specifically define what manufacturers can say about cholesterol on the label . If approved , food processors would be able to say a product is cholesterol-free if there is less than 2 milligrams of cholesterol in each serving , or describe the product as low cholesterol if each serving has less than 20 milligrams of cholesterol . A reduced cholesterol statement would mean that the cholesterol normally in such a product has been reduced by at least 75 % , according to the FDA proposal . Manufacturers who make statements about cholesterol on the label would also be required to list whether the fat is polyunsaturated or saturated . Gee says that in looking at labels , consumers should keep in mind dietary guidelines , such as the American Heart Assn . recommendations on sodium , cholesterol and fat . Cholesterol consumption should be limited to less than 300 milligrams a day , and daily fat intake should be less than 30 % of total calories , according to those guidelines . The guidelines allow for a broader range of sodium -- 2,000 to 5,000 milligrams per day -- with people with hypertension or other health problems advised to stick closer to the lower end of the range . ( The average American intake is about 7,000 milligrams . ) It is important to consider not only total calories , but the distribution of total calories in the food , Gee says , because the healthiest diet has a calorie distribution that is predominantly protein and complex carbohydrates . Also , nutritionists say it is harder to lose weight if too many of the calories are from fat . Each gram of fat equals 9 calories and each gram of carbohydrates and protein equals 4 calories , Gee says . To determine the percentage of total calories that is fat , multiply the number of grams by 9 and divide the result by the total number of calories in the dish . Many of the popular low-calorie prepared meals vary widely in how the calories are distributed among protein , carbohydrates and fat . For example , Weight Watchers ' 370-calorie Cheese Enchiladas Ranchero dinner has 22 grams of fat . Thus , 53 % of the calories come from fat , 18 % from protein and 28 % from carbohydrates . The fat content is far above the recommended guideline for one meal , Gee says . The 220 calories in the Le Menu Light Style Herb Roasted Chicken dinner is made up of 24 % fat ( 6 grams ) , and 38 % each ( 21 grams ) protein and carbohydrates . A way to visualize how much fat is consumed , Gee said , is to convert grams to teaspoons . Five grams of fat is equal to a teaspoon of oil , she says . Thus the fat in that particular Weight Watchers dinner is like downing nearly 4 1/2 teaspoons of oil .