Sarah Vaughan , whose remarkable range and smoky contralto voice earned her the nickname `` The Divine One , '' has died of lung cancer , it was announced Wednesday . She was 66 . Miss Vaughan , who had checked out of Cedars Sinai Hospital a few hours earlier , died at 9:20 p.m. Tuesday at her home in Hidden Hills , according to her attorney and manager , Harold Levy . Levy said he and Miss Vaughan 's 87-year-old mother , Ada , and her adopted daughter , actress Paris Deborah Vaughan , were at her side when she died . Levy said they were watching a television movie in which the daughter appeared . Dubbed `` Sassy '' for her onstage manner , Miss Vaughan was associated with recordings of such perennial jazz and pop favorites as `` Body and Soul , '' `` It 's Magic , '' `` Misty , '' `` I Cover the Waterfront , '' `` Lover Man , '' `` Here 's That Rainy Day '' and `` Send in the Clowns . '' Despite her seven-month fight with cancer , Miss Vaughan had hoped to begin working on a new recording this week . Levy said complications forced her to go to the hospital Saturday , but that she decided Tuesday she would be more comfortable in her home . Last Sept. 3 , after Mayor Tom Bradley proclaimed Sarah Vaughan Day in Los Angeles , she sang with the Los Angeles Philharmonic at the Hollywood Bowl , capping her long career and delighting 11,878 fans with the soaring lyric voice that made her so popular for nearly five decades . Four days later , Miss Vaughan , a longtime smoker , was diagnosed with lung cancer and carcinoma of the joints in one hand . `` She just kept becoming greater and greater as the years went on , '' Times jazz critic Leonard Feather , a longtime friend of Miss Vaughan , said Wednesday . `` In the last few years she was just astonishing . She was the idol and envy of virtually all singers . '' Feather appraised her professional versatility in his `` Encyclopedia of Jazz Singers '' by saying that she was `` capable of incomparable jazz performances yet qualified to be an opera singer . '' That opinion was echoed Wednesday by Times music critic Martin Bernheimer , who reviews performances of classical music including opera : '' Sarah Vaughan had a voice of extraordinary sweetness , flexibility and purity , and she used it with uncanny insinuation throughout a wide range . She could have taught many an opera diva lessons in breath control , in legato phrasing and in expressive communication . She was a great singer . Period . '' `` Now that Sassy is gone , '' said Miss Vaughan 's longtime friend , comedian Bill Cosby , `` there is no one to measure great singers by . '' Miss Vaughan , who recorded popular and standard songs as well as jazz classics , had scoffed at attempts by fans and music critics to categorize her as a jazz singer . `` I just sing , '' she said . `` I sing whatever I can . '' Born March 27 , 1924 , in Newark , N.J. , to a carpenter and a laundress , she received her musical training in the church choir with her mother , first as a singer and later as organist . She claimed she never envisioned getting into show business , even when , on a friend 's dare , she signed up for amateur night at New York 's storied Apollo Theater in 1942 . `` I just quit in the third year of high school and started singing at amateur hours , '' she once told an interviewer . `` The night I won at the Apollo I was only doing it for the $ 10 . '' But Billy Eckstine heard her that night and recommended her to band leader Earl ( Fatha ) Hines , who hired her . Her career as a concert and recording star was launched . Feather , who was present at the Apollo when Miss Vaughan first opened there with Hines ' band April 23 , 1943 , wrote of her in his jazz encyclopedia : '' Sarah Vaughan 's voice , completely different from that of Billie Holiday , Ella Fitzgerald or any of the other great jazz stylists before her , brought to jazz an unprecedented combination of attractive characteristics : a rich , beautifully controlled tone and vibrato ; an ear for the chord structure of songs , enabling her to change or inflect the melody as an instrumentalist might ; a coy , sometimes archly naive quality alternating with a sense of great sophistication . '' Fitzgerald herself once called Miss Vaughan `` the greatest singing talent in the world today . '' Miss Vaughan 's remarkable range with the husky voice , made huskier over the years by her smoking , was so extraordinary that it often prompted exaggeration . `` They say four octaves but it 's not true , '' she said modestly in a 1986 interview . `` Two octaves and a fifth maybe . Maybe a little more . '' Her voice was considered more instrumental than vocal and was often likened to a horn , a comparison she found logical . `` I do n't think I ever modeled myself after a singer , '' she said . `` I 've more or less copied the styles of horn-tooters right from the start . '' Miss Vaughan did admit to some influence by singer Marian Anderson . The prize for one of the amateur contests she won as a teen-ager was a choice between roller skates or a ticket to a Marian Anderson concert . She chose the concert and said she `` fell in love with the sound of her voice . '' After her debut with Hines , Miss Vaughan toured with his band for a year , working with Dizzy Gillespie and Charlie Parker and trying to imitate their trumpet and saxophone . When Eckstine formed his own band in 1944 , he hired Miss Vaughan and backed her in her first recording , `` I 'll Wait and Pray . '' Feather , a jazz musician as well as critic , received a demonstration record of Miss Vaughan 's singing from Gillespie and arranged for her to record under her own name with Continental . She sang four songs for $ 20 each , with Feather playing the piano accompaniment . Miss Vaughan first won a national following with her recording of `` Lover Man , '' made with Gillespie . Her early career , which she dismissed in interviews as paying `` a lot of dues , '' included concerts in tobacco warehouses and barns in the South , as well as modestly successful records and a few appearances in places like New York 's Copacabana in the 1940s . `` It was n't until the early 1950s that Sassy began singing in the better spots and collected a following -- like at Birdland in New York . . . and the Blue Note in Chicago , where Dave Garroway heard her , called her 'the Divine One ' and promoted her on radio and TV , '' John Malachi , an early accompanist who nicknamed her `` Sassy , '' recalled in an interview a few years ago . By the 1970s she had a strong international following and won Downbeat 's international critics ' poll for best female singer in the world six times -- 1973 and 1975-79 . She sang with major symphony orchestras and for heads of state and in prestigious places like Carnegie Hall . As recently as last year , her concert performances prompted a reviewer to write that `` she continues to cause excitement wherever she appears . '' `` Thank God , '' said Levy Wednesday , `` we have her recordings to preserve her greatness . She was one of a kind . '' Miss Vaughan married and divorced four husbands : trumpeter George Treadwell , former pro football player Clyde Atkins , Las Vegas restaurateur Marshall Fisher , and musician Waymon Reed . Funeral services are scheduled Saturday in her home city of Newark . Levy said plans for a memorial service in Los Angeles are pending . REMEMBERING 'SASSY ' -- Leonard Feather recalls Sarah Vaughan 's career . F1