Two activist priests Tuesday accused the FBI of trying to coerce a Salvadoran factory worker into spying on a downtown Los Angeles church that has been a haven for hundreds of illegal immigrants and Central-American refugees . Father Luis Olivares , pastor of Our Lady Queen of the Angels Roman Catholic Church , said the alleged efforts to spy on members of the church , also known as La Placita , formed part of a longstanding campaign to discredit the parish 's work on behalf of refugees . Olivares said he has requested FBI files on the church under the Freedom of Information Act , and Rep. Don Edwards ( D-San Jose ) has also asked the FBI for an explanation . FBI Special Agent Fred Reagan , a spokesman for the agency , refused to comment on the allegations . In a press conference at the church , Olivares and Father Michael Kennedy said that on Oct. 5 , an FBI agent approached Alberto Palacios , a 53-year-old Salvadoran refugee who fled his country in 1985 after imprisonment for union activities . Palacios , who also appeared at the press conference , said the agent interrogated him for nearly two hours and informed him that he was under investigation apparently in connection with a plan that Palacios had devised to raise money for Salvadoran children wounded in that country 's 10-year-old civil war . Then , Palacios said , the agent told him that `` things would go better '' for Palacios if he cooperated with federal agents by naming the most politically active organizers at La Placita . `` He told me I should go to see who were the organized , '' Palacios said . The agent `` gave me his phone number to call him with this information . '' Palacios identified the agent as Thomas S. Caldwell , and presented a card that Palacios said the agent had given him . A Thomas Caldwell works for the FBI 's Los Angeles office , but a reporter 's phone calls to the man were not returned . `` This is one of the situations where we ca n't respond , '' Reagan said . Palacios said the agent gave him six months to come up with some information , during which time the Salvadoran struggled to decide whether to seek help . Finally , last month , he went to the Central American Refugee Center , which has taken his case . Linton Joaquin , an attorney for the refugee center , said he has asked the FBI for full disclosure of any investigation involving Palacios . The allegations of FBI spying are the latest in a series of controversies surrounding Olivares , an outspoken critic of U.S. policies in Central America . The Immigration and Naturalization Service threatened a criminal investigation into Olivares ' activities after his decision in 1985 to declare La Placita a sanctuary for refugees . And he has received numerous death threats since 1987 , some reminiscent of warnings from death squads active in El Salvador . `` Having been declared a public sanctuary , there has always existed a sort of doubt over whether our activities on behalf of refugees are , in fact , religious , '' Olivares said . `` The implication has been that our movement was a cover for extreme left political activities , aimed at destabilizing the U.S. government . It has always been seen with suspicion . '' Olivares said that the allegations of FBI surveillance represent another effort to link people working at La Placita and others who work with Central-American refugees to leftist guerrilla groups . At the start of this decade , the FBI 's anti-terrorism division conducted a wide-ranging , five-year probe into the Committee in Solidarity with the People of El Salvador , a pro-left organization that opposes U.S. policy in Central America . The investigation failed to prove a link between the solidarity committee and terrorism , and six FBI agents were eventually disciplined for negligence in the investigation .