United States Shoe Corp. announced Monday that it will sell its footwear division , its name and its Cincinnati headquarters to a management-led group for $ 422.5 million in cash . The purchase excludes U.S. Shoe 's Cincinnati-based LensCrafters division , which operates retail eyeglass stores , and the women 's apparel retail division , based in Enfield , Conn. Key executives of U.S. Shoe 's footwear division , including Howard Platt , a company executive vice president who is president of the footwear division , are leaders in the purchasing group , U.S. Shoe said . 500 Retail Stores The deal involves its major footwear distribution center in Cincinnati . U.S. Shoe said it will surrender its name to the new company and choose another name more suited to its remaining businesses . The division makes , imports and sells footwear and operates about 500 retail stores . It sells boots through its Texas Boot and Wrangler Boot divisions and markets women 's footwear lines Amalfi , Bandolino , Calvin Klein , Capezio , Cobbie , David Evins , Easy Spirit , Evan Picone , Garolini , Innovations , Joyce , Liz Claiborne , Pappagallo , Red Cross Shoes and Selby . The transaction is to be concluded within 90 days . U.S. Shoe 's board of directors said it plans to use some of the proceeds of the sale to raise the dividend on the stock to $ 1 this year from 46 cents . The company said it expects that the net proceeds will total $ 390 million , after taxes and expenses , and is subject to possible adjustments of the purchase price before the transaction is closed . Up to $ 50 million of the proceeds will be used to pay off long-term debts , U.S. Shoe officials said . Merrill Lynch Capital Partners Inc. , an affiliate of Merrill Lynch Capital Markets , is leading the investment group and has provided commitments for $ 160 million of equity and subordinated debt financing for the transaction , U.S. Shoe said . Potential for Growth Philip G. Barach , chairman and chief executive of U.S. Shoe , said the sale results from an overall review the company announced last August to explore ways it could increase corporate value to the shareholders . `` As part of this process , approximately 80 parties worldwide were contacted in an effort to solicit offers for all of U.S. Shoe or for any of its businesses , '' he said . Barach said no prospective buyer wanted to acquire all of U.S. Shoe or made an acceptable offer for the women 's apparel division . Several bidders made offers for the LensCrafters division , but it was retained in part because of its strong potential for growth , he said .