A demand by former Mayor Roger Hedgecock 's representative for a one-page agreement committing KGTV ( Channel 10 ) to 13 weeks of Hedgecock 's talk show led to the show 's sudden demise , station officials said Friday . The talk show was canceled Wednesday after the first and only episode had aired the previous Sunday . According to Channel 10 program manager Don Lundy , he and Mel Buxbaum , Hedgecock 's former press secretary and the show 's producer , had reached an agreement on a contract calling for 13 weeks of the show . The contract included provisions giving the station the right to review the show 's subject matter before production and to cancel the show if it did not attract ratings . On Wednesday , however , Lundy said Buxbaum called and said that Hedgecock would not do the next show , scheduled to be taped Thursday , unless the station signed a one-page agreement committing the station to 13 weeks . `` I did n't want to get stuck with a show that was a loser , '' Lundy said . `` It is something we do with every show . '' Buxbaum said Friday that he never made any demands , that he only sought to further negotiate the contract the station had sent him . The deal fell through , Buxbaum said , when Channel 10 refused to negotiate . Quinn and Lundy had promised to supply the one-page agreement , he added . On his KSDO-AM ( 1130 ) talk show Thursday morning , several callers suggested that the show had been canceled because Channel 10 wanted to avoid controversial subjects . Hedgecock encouraged listeners to call the station to complain . `` I find it inconceivable that viewers and listeners would make that assumption and Hedgecock , knowing the truth , would play along with it , '' Channel 10 general manager Ed Quinn said Friday , noting that Channel 10 airs such `` controversial '' personalities as Oprah Winfrey , Michael Tuck and Morton Downey Jr. '' We 're certainly not afraid of controversy , '' Quinn said . `` That 's simply ridiculous . '' According to Lundy , the agreed-upon contract gave control of the show to Buxbaum 's production company , with only a few standard content `` review '' stipulations . However , the agreement that Hedgecock wanted would have given the ex-mayor `` carte blanche '' to put anything on the air , Quinn said . `` All he wanted was a one-page agreement that essentially said 'We love Roger and we will do 13 weeks , ' `` Quinn said . `` As a businessman I just could n't do that . '' Buxbaum said several provisions in the contract he received Wednesday , including the subject review clause , were never discussed in his negotiations with Lundy . According to Hedgecock , Channel 10 was seeking control of the content . `` The contract that came back basically said they could cancel the show at any time , '' Hedgecock said , noting that he was not involved in the contract negotiations . He refused to comment further . Channel 10 officials said the subject review clause was only an attempt to keep the show lively . A first attempt at a show was shelved after both Channel 10 and Hedgecock agreed it was not up to expected levels . After the first taping , most of Buxbaum 's production staff either quit or was fired . `` We were having so much trouble with Mel , we were n't going to get into a situation with a loosey-goosey , open-ended deal from one show to the next , '' Quinn said .