ORANGE -- A COLOR born in Southern California -- is emerging as a major spring/summer fashion shade . Now orange lipstick , nail polish , blusher and even eye shadow are part of the trend . As Vivian Behrens , vice president of marketing for Estee Lauder , says : `` Orange is going through a major reawakening . '' Once pegged as a makeup color for casual , beachy , California types , orange became sophisticated and internationally important last fall when French and Italian designers showed their purple and khaki spring fashions on models wearing orange cosmetics . Jean Paul Gaultier not only featured orange on his models ' lips and eyelids but also scattered a few `` I Love Lucy '' redheads throughout his fashion show . Gianfranco Ferre used deep mango and persimmon shades on lips and nails to accent his elegant evening gowns and swimwear . And New York 's pricey designers -- Donna Karan , Louis Dell'Olio for Anne Klein and the upstart Isaac Mizrahi -- all have used orange as a spring staple . In the past , many women would not wear orange clothes because the yellow undertones in pumpkin-orange seemed to drain their complexions of color . But this season , fashion designers are using oranges that are rich with red or gold undertones . With the right makeup , the new oranges can make skin tones come alive . Estee Lauder is offering bold oranges in its Heading West and Perfect Lipsticks collections . Behrens of Estee Lauder reports that consumers are eagerly opting for the bright new oranges . A new Lauder moisturizing lipstick called Perfect Orange has been a sell-out success in every store that carries it , she says . `` The sun-streaked look is hot right now , and the trend is going to continue through the summer , '' Behrens says , adding that touches of orange makeup are the perfect complement to the sunny look . Clinique 's newest shades include Sun Tang , a rich coral lipstick pencil with a built-in sun-protection factor . Princess Marcella Borghese 's Tangeri is a deep , true-orange lip color that is sold in the same collection with orange eye shadow from Borghese 's Solare collection . In its see-through tube , Sunshine gloss from Christian Dior looks just like Crayola orange , but on the lips it becomes a sheer , golden tint . Yves Saint Laurent 's summer line features a lip and nail color called Golden Apricot . Max Factor 's Chameleon , a versatile coral , can be worn with pink and red outfits as well as with shades of orange . Maybelline is promoting mocha- and ginger-color lipstick that is worn with apricot blusher . Whether intense or barely there , the overall effect of beauty 's new oranges is decidedly tawny yet sophisticated . As Gale Hayman , the Beverly Hills cosmetics manufacturer , says : `` This is the look that started in California and came back via Paris . '' Model : Nancy Sheppard / Prima ; makeup : Dominic Cervantes / Zenobia ; stylist : Karen O'Neill