Weight control depends on a basic equation : Create a caloric deficit between what you consume and what you expend and you will lose weight . Create a caloric overload by eating more calories than you burn and you will add weight . That simple fact holds true despite hundreds of articles promising weight loss without having to eat one bite less or walk one step more . Critics in the anti-exercise camp are fond of pointing out that for a 130-pound woman to burn off the calories in a slice of apple pie , she must bicycle for 68 minutes at nine miles an hour , swim the crawl 53 minutes or do 83 minutes of brisk walking , covering four miles an hour . Add a scoop of vanilla ice cream and it would take 113 minutes of cycling , 88 minutes of swimming and 131 minutes walking briskly . That , they argue , is an unreasonable amount of exertion for one modest dessert ; and , by extension of faulty logic , exercise is of no help in weight control . We come down firmly on the other side in the debate . ( People on weight-reducing diets -- or , for that matter , anyone concerned about cholesterol -- should not be eating pie a la mode in the first place , except on special occasions . ) Exercise Essential The heart of the matter is this : No weight-loss program should be without an exercise component . Exercise burns calories ; and the more you do , the more calories you burn . Increased physical activity does not always require jumping onto a bike or wriggling into a swimsuit , although those are wonderful ways of using up calories and boosting cardiovascular fitness . It can take a much simpler form , such as using the stairs instead of the elevator at work or getting off the bus a stop farther from home and walking the rest of the way back . Whatever the combination of activities , an increased daily output of 500 calories will lead to the loss of a pound in about a week , without having to reduce caloric intake by a single bite . If 500 calories a day seems like too much , especially at the outset , be content with less -- keeping in mind that it will just take a little longer to reach your goal . If you 're out of shape when you begin to exercise , you 'll probably notice that the more you do the easier it gets . That 's all to the good . Oxygen is required to burn off fat during exercise , and aerobic exercise enlarges the body 's capacity to use oxygen . In practical terms , this allows you to move around at a higher intensity , thereby burning more calories than if you did the same activity slowly . You will also notice that you are able to go longer without tiring . Energy Use at Rest Exercise fosters the creation of a caloric imbalance in other ways too . In recent years , much research has focused on the effects of exercise on `` resting energy expenditure '' -- the number of calories used in carrying out basic body functions . Lean body mass is more active metabolically than fat and therefore burns more calories . Dieting , especially when calories are severely restricted , results in the loss of both body fat and muscle . The loss of lean tissue , in turn , leads to a decline in resting energy expenditure ; that 's obviously counterproductive to efforts at weight loss . On the other hand , exercise that helps build muscle can be expected to prevent a decline , or even bring an increase , in resting energy expenditure . Beyond these benefits , exercise has also been found to decrease appetite and promote a psychological sense of well-being . Getting started on an exercise regimen is really a three-step process . It is a good idea to start with a medical evaluation , especially if you are over 40 and underexercised . Step two is to select activities appropriate to your fitness level and life style . Third , do an audit of your weekday and weekend routines , planning ahead for the type and amount of exercise you might find reasonable . As you proceed through the first week , keep a diary of what worked and what failed . That will help you to plan a more realistic program for the next week . Above all , stick with it . They say that nothing succeeds like success . One of the most effective morale boosters and dietary aids we know is the feeling you get from looking in the mirror and seeing an improved figure in the glass -- not only thinner but well-toned besides . While dieting can help you reach a weight goal , only springing into action can give you the look and feel of fitness that comes with having a well-exercised body . 'Stress Formula Capsules ' Provide Way to Sell Unnecessary Vitamins Question : I was browsing in a health-food store when a salesperson , noticing my briefcase , engaged in a conversation in which she assumed that I must have a `` high-stress '' job . Accordingly , she tried to sell me a stress-formula vitamin preparation . I resisted , but later found myself wondering whether stress increases nutrient requirements . Does it ? Answer : No . The operative word here is not nutrition but marketing . Stress-formula vitamin capsules are just one more way of marketing large doses of vitamins , usually B vitamins and Vitamin C , that nobody needs . Often the promotions for these preparations suggest that smokers need more Vitamin C , or that oral contraceptives increase requirements for folacin and Vitamin B-6 . While it may be that for these groups biochemical measurements for some nutrients may be lower than among the general population , levels are still well within normal range . Indeed , there is no objective evidence to indicate that smoking , use of oral contraceptives or increased emotional stress raise the need for vitamins higher than the Recommended Dietary Allowances ( RDAs ) . These allowances are best met by a varied diet of fresh and lightly processed foods , accompanied , if you wish , by a single multivitamin pill containing no more than 100 % of the RDAs for any nutrient . So , even if your briefcase does signal a position fraught with emotional stress , there is no reason to believe that your coping skills will be enhanced by taking a high-potency vitamin pill . Q : What is the nutritional value of a nectarine ? A : A nectarine weighing five ounces provides about 65 calories . As for vitamins , its most notable contribution ( if it is a deep-yellow nectarine ) is Vitamin A , providing about 20 % of the U.S . Recommended Daily Allowance . It also contains small amounts of B vitamins and some Vitamin C. And for those individuals who are taking antidiuretic medications , it provides generous amounts of potassium . While nectarines are commonly thought of as a relatively modern cross between a peach and a plum , their origins go back into the mists of history . The fruit is related to both the almond and the rose families and apparently was a delicacy in ancient China and the Near East more than 2,000 years ago . It 's possible that nectarines may even predate the modern peach . Q : How prevalent is breast-feeding nowadays , and how common is the practice among working women ? A : Since 1955 , Ross Laboratories has used mail questionnaires to monitor breast feeding . Results of the 1987 survey , reported recently in Pediatrics , the Journal of the American Academy of Pediatrics , indicate that approximately 55 % of all women breast fed their infants while they were in the hospital . But among some groups , rates were considerably different . For example , rates tended to be higher among women not employed outside the home , at least 30 years old , in high family-income groups , college educated , white and living in the Rocky Mountain or Pacific regions . Comparison of breast-feeding rates in relation to work was limited to those who reported working full-time and those who said that they were not employed outside the home . By the time the infants were 6 months old , only 10 % of the women who were working full-time were still breast-feeding , compared to 24.3 % of those who were not working . ( We reiterate that not working means not employed outside the home ; we recognize that being a mother is a job unto itself . ) But a comparison between working and nonworking women tells only part of the story . Among white , nonworking mothers in the Pacific region , for example , almost 80 % were breast feeding in the hospital , and 38 % of them were still doing so six months later . On the other hand , the incidence of continued breast feeding among those who returned to full-time employment was higher among black women ( especially those who were at least 25 years old ) in higher-income groups who had college educations . The upshot is that while full-time employment does not deter women from breast feeding in the hospital , it seems to have a considerable impact on their continuing to do so . There are a number of reasons for this . For one thing , some women find nursing to be an extra burden in an already hectic existence . For another , day-care arrangements usually do not provide conditions favorable to breast feeding . Q : In a recent column about beef hormones , you alluded to problems with the federal inspection system . Can you tell me more ? A : Both the Food and Drug Administration and the Food Safety Inspection Service , agencies charged with monitoring our food supply , are undermanned and overworked . The FSIS has been mandated by the law to focus its resources on problem areas and is cutting back on its work force -- down to 7,000 inspectors last year from about 10,000 in 1980 . FDA has about 700 inspectors and scientists to deal with its many responsibilities , not just for foods but for drugs and cosmetics . During the recent furor over poisoned Chilean grapes , some inspectors had to be pulled from other tasks to check fruit from Chile . This left other foods unmonitored for that period . Our food supply remains the safest in the world , but we want to keep it that way . Ironically , at a time when consumers are more concerned than ever with health and safety issues surrounding food , we are chipping away at a line of defense by undermining the strength of the FDA and the FSIS .