Rafael Angel Calderon , whose father 's Costa Rican political career ended in exile , was sworn in Tuesday as president of Central America 's most enduring democracy . Invoking his father 's one-time populist ideals and briefly acknowledging the foreign activism and peacemaking role of his predecessor , Oscar Arias Sanchez , Calderon promised to tackle Costa Rica 's deficit . He also pledged to help lead , by example , a region that until only recently has been torn by civil war and violence . `` Only the combination of economic growth and social justice can immunize democracies against the totalitarian dangers of the extreme right and the extreme left , '' he told a capacity crowd at the 25,000-seat National Stadium . During his 40-minute speech , Calderon was flanked by all of Central America 's heads of state , including Nicaragua 's new president , Violeta Barrios de Chamorro . Most of the leaders , like Calderon , are newly elected moderate conservatives . Calderon said regional troubles appear to have eased and that many of the Central American nations have edged toward Costa Rica 's century-old example of democratic stability . `` Being now halfway down the road toward a better future , it is for us , the presidents of Central America , to assume the responsibility of leading our peoples into a new stage in the process , in which the great goal will no longer be to silence the uproar of cannon fire , but to take off at last toward economic development , '' he said . First Lady Barbara Bush , appearing calm and proud on her first solo venture abroad to represent her husband , was cheered when she led the U.S. delegation into the stadium . Earlier , she had delivered a letter from her husband , in which he pledged to work with Calderon to `` bring peace , democracy and development to the region . '' Calderon 's Feb. 4 victory ended eight years of rule by Arias ' National Liberation Party . It was also the 10th consecutive election in Costa Rica since Rafael Calderon Guardia , president from 1940 to 1944 , sparked a civil war after he tried to nullify the vote in his losing 1948 electoral campaign . The family was driven into exile in Nicaragua , where Rafael Angel Calderon , known as Junior , was born . Calderon , 41 , has tried to follow in his father 's footsteps almost since he graduated from the University of Costa Rica law school in 1972 . He served in various government posts and lost two presidential campaigns . But in his most current bid , at the head of the Social Christian Unity Party , he had the help of Roger Ailes , President Bush 's campaign wizard . Ailes refashioned Calderon 's image from that of a hard-liner on foreign issues into that of a man of the people -- a reflection of his father 's early political life . Ailes was part of the U.S. delegation Tuesday along with John H. Sununu , the President 's chief of staff , and his wife , Nancy ; former Puerto Rican President Luis Ferre , and the Bushes ' son , Jeb . Calderon promised to reduce the $ 35-million deficit of Costa Rica , a country the size of West Virginia with a population of 2.2 million , by forcing `` self-sacrifice . '' He said he will encourage new markets and bolster tourism but insisted he will keep his campaign promise to build 160,000 housing units by his term 's end .