Fluor Daniel Inc. , the giant engineering and construction company , said Wednesday that it has been awarded two contracts in China -- one for engineering work at a petrochemical plant and the other for consulting work for two pharmaceutical factories . The deals are the first in China that Fluor has made public since the bloody political crackdown by the Chinese government in June , 1989 . The firm has been involved in more than half a dozen business deals in China since then , but has not publicized them at the request of the Chinese . Deborah Land , a spokeswoman for Irvine-based Fluor Corp. , Fluor Daniel 's parent , said the company has worked on more than 50 projects in China since it began doing business there in the late 1970s . `` The awards are significant in that they will position us as an exporter in the bio-technical and pharmaceutical industries , '' Land said . For one of the projects announced Wednesday , Fluor will supply engineering and procurement services for a proposed $ 50-million ethylene oxide plant in northeast China . Fluor estimated the value of the contract with Jilin Chemical Industries at $ 24 million . The Jilin plant , which starts construction next year , will produce 40,000 tons of ethylene oxide annually when completed in 1993 , said Andy Blair , project manager of Fluor Daniel 's Canadian subsidiary , which will perform the work . The chemical is a derivative used for automotive brake fluid , antifreeze and detergent products . Fluor also has received a contract of undisclosed value from Beijing-based China National Technical Import & Export Corp. to provide consulting services for two Chinese pharmaceutical plants planned in Shanghai and the eastern China city of Zibo . The two plants will manufacture capsules , tablets and injectable products for intravenous purposes , said Marshall Bautz , Fluor Daniel project manager . `` What the Chinese want is to make drugs to ( U.S. Food and Drug Administration ) quality standard , '' Bautz said . `` They 're planning to sell them around the world , ( but ) not to the United States . '' China National is a diversified company in Beijing , with annual sales of about $ 4 billion , said Liang Wei Qiang , manager of China Technical Corp. , the Fort Lee , N.J. , unit of China National . The parent buys , sells and manufactures industrial parts and plants and is involved in both heavy and light industrial manufacturing .