A gunman walked into a crowded restaurant in Monterey Park early one morning last November and fatally shot a 40-year-old Taiwanese man . By last month , Monterey Park police detectives had tracked their suspect to Taipei . With the help of Taiwanese diplomats in Los Angeles who sent crime reports by telex to Taiwan , and with the assistance of a Mandarin-speaking Monterey Park police reserve officer on vacation in Taipei , Taiwanese police found the suspect and put him under surveillance . On Tuesday , police arrested Huang Chue Ming , 35 , at Taipei International Airport as he attempted to board a flight to the Philippines . Monterey Park police said Huang has denied killing Hsu Chia Liang at the Sea Palace Restaurant on South Atlantic Boulevard . According to an article in last Thursday 's Chinese-language Centre Daily News published in Monterey Park , Huang told Taiwanese police that five other men committed the crime . Moy said that there have been many theories about the motive for the killing , but that `` we have nothing concrete . '' Lived in Monterey Park Moy declined to provide details about the victim , Hsu , or his family members , some of whom still live in the San Gabriel Valley . He did say that the suspect and the victim had been in contact before the shooting and that Hsu had lived in Monterey Park for several years . There is no extradition from Taiwan to the United States . The United States severed diplomatic ties with Taiwan in 1979 . Nevertheless , authorities say , Taiwan will likely prosecute Huang for the Monterey Park homicide . Although this procedure is unusual , it is not unheard of . `` ( Taiwanese officials ) just do n't like the idea of people leaving their country going around committing crimes , '' Monterey Park Detective Jones Moy said . Interviewed 45 Witnesses Authorities noted that detectives from Monterey Park and the Los Angeles County Sheriff 's Department had assisted in the Taiwanese prosecution of a killing that occurred earlier in Southern California . In the case of Hsu 's killing , Moy and former Police Chief Robert Collins , who retired in February but who continued to help in the investigation , have spent months interviewing 45 witnesses . No weapon has yet been found in what was one of seven homicides reported in the city last year . And many of the 40 to 50 patrons at the Sea Palace Restaurant fled before police arrived shortly after the 1 a.m. shooting . At first , Collins said , `` everybody denied seeing anything . '' Many of the patrons were of Asian descent , Moy said , and this contributed to their reluctance to speak with police . Often , police say , newcomers from Asia see police in terms of their homelands , where law enforcement officers are viewed more as protectors of the government rather than as crime fighters . The reluctance of some witnesses , Moy said , also resulted from the same hesitancy that anyone has . `` They just do n't want to get involved , '' he said . Eventually , though , police developed enough information to pursue Huang . During 1987 and 1988 , police said , Huang lived at a number of locations throughout the San Gabriel Valley . But there was nothing on his record more serious than traffic violations , Moy said . Suspect Denies Killing Last month , Moy first contacted Taiwanese officials in the Los Angeles office of the Coordination Council for North American Affairs , which functions as Taiwan 's quasi-embassy . Later that month , Winston Yuen , a Monterey Park police reserve , visited Taipei police and explained the murder case in detail . Unsure How Case Will Proceed Monterey Park police said they are unsure how Taiwanese officials will handle the case . And because of the 15-hour time difference , police by Thursday had only been able to talk with Taiwanese authorities a few times to sort out details . Liang-Houh Shieh , a Los Angeles attorney who once represented criminal defendants in Taiwan , explained that there is no arraignment comparable to the American legal system . He said a judge decides whether a suspect should be charged and whether bail is allowed . There is no jury trial , only trial by a judge , Shieh said . Penalties are generally stiffer , he said , and defendants have fewer rights than those afforded in America . `` Of course , the legal system is not 100 % like it is here , '' said Daniel T. C. Liao of the coordination council . `` But we 're happy to be able to help American officials fight crime . '' In the end , Liao said , if Monterey Park police are n't satisfied with the results in Taiwan , `` I do n't know how they will close their case '' since there is no extradition . Said Collins : `` It 's hard for us , since we 're here and ( the suspect ) is there . ''