United Airlines said Tuesday that it will begin service from the Ontario airport in San Bernardino County to Oakland on July 5 with special introductory fares that will be the lowest implemented since major carriers began discounting fares in the California market about six weeks ago . However , Southwest Airlines immediately matched United 's special $ 25 and $ 29 fares . United would not disclose what its fare structure will be after the brief introductory period but said its fares `` will remain competitive and will be the lowest of any carrier serving the Oakland-Ontario market . '' Southwest interprets that statement to mean that United will match its regular $ 49 , unrestricted one-way fare on the Oakland-Ontario route , said David Brown , Southwest 's chief spokesman . No other carrier so far has matched this regular $ 49 fare . Brown vowed , however , that Southwest will not be undersold . `` For 20 years , we have been dedicated to having the lowest fare in any market we serve . We see no reason to change that business philosophy , '' Brown said . The Ontario-Oakland market `` is a heavily traveled route , '' United spokeswoman Sara Dornacker said . `` We would like to make some inroads into that local market . '' United said it will begin Oakland-Ontario service with a $ 25 one-way fare good for travel between July 5 and July 12 , provided that the ticket is purchased between June 10 and July 4 . The special fare structure also includes a $ 29 one-way fare without an advance purchase requirement but good for travel only between July 5 and July 15 . Southwest Started Trend A spokeswoman said the fares will be available for every seat on every flight during those periods . Southwest said it will match those fares in every detail . Southwest , a small Dallas-based carrier , is credited by some with starting this spring 's widespread discounting in the California market . It has distinguished itself from the other carriers by offering the $ 49 unrestricted fare for every seat on each of its six daily nonstop Oakland-Ontario flights and five daily nonstops between Oakland and San Diego . Southwest also offers a $ 29 one-way , 21-day advance purchase fare for those routes , which has been matched by other carriers .