Low-income tenants in the Westside needing free legal assistance in resolving housing matters will have one less place to turn to this summer . The Legal Aid Foundation announced that it will close its Santa Monica office July 1 because of a shortage of funds . The office on Pico Boulevard nearly closed last year because of money problems , and cut back its hours to 18 a week . But even that was not enough . Attorney Jack Schwartz , who managed the office , said he was disappointed by the decision , and he forecast a gloomy future for low-income tenants . `` The number of homeless in the Westside will double , and there will be a tenfold increase in the number of illegal evictions , '' Schwartz predicted . `` The Westside is going to become whiter and wealthier and with fewer children . '' The Legal Aid office provides free legal assistance for low-income tenants faced with eviction notices , substandard living conditions and other landlord-tenant problems . Although tenants will have access to the downtown Los Angeles Legal Aid office , most of the slack is expected to be picked up by Westside Legal Services in Santa Monica . Westside Legal Services , which was formed nine years ago after Central Legal de Santa Monica and Santa Monica Legal Aid Society merged , is also expected to receive city funds that had been going to the Legal Aid Foundation . Elena Popp , executive director of Westside Legal Services , said she has asked that the $ 66,542 from the city that would have gone to Legal Aid for 1990-91 be given to her group . With that money , Popp said , the group plans to hire an additional full-time attorney and a paralegal to take over the clients of Legal Aid . In addition to aid in landlord-tenant disputes , Legal Services , at Colorado Boulevard and 6th Street , provides free legal aid in areas including domestic violence . The group also receives funding from the city . The group is asking for about $ 123,000 for 1990-91 . The funding requests will be considered by the City Council during the annual city budget review in June . But even with the additional money , legal assistance for the Westside 's poor is still inadequate , Popp said . `` We 'll be expanding our services , but the legal needs of poor people are still severely unmet , '' she said .