Some people in Orange County are apparently not listening : Too much sun is not good for you . Sun worshipers who frolic on the county 's beaches without protection from the glare of cloudless skies may very likely get skin cancer . Doctors at UC Irvine 's Melanoma Center say they know they sound like a broken record , but they figure many outdoors types in this county are still not paying attention . And now they have more evidence of that . During a skin cancer screening offered by the center during April and May , 1 of every 5 persons was diagnosed with skin cancer , while almost a third had precancerous lesions -- numbers that alarmed some doctors and others at the center . `` We were really amazed at what we saw , '' said Leslie Ann Cyril , a spokesperson for the center . `` Melanomas are being discovered in much younger people . That 's what 's so surprising . '' Dr. Matthew Goodman , co-director of the melanoma center , cautioned that these results are not an accurate measure of skin cancer prevalence among the general population , nor was this meant as a scientific study . The 175 people who were screened , he said , probably likely suspected they might have a problem with skin abnormalities , including skin cancer . However , he said , results of this screening echo trends in national studies showing that skin cancer is on the rise , especially among people who live in sunny Southern California . `` It reiterates the need to use good judgment in our sun habits and the use of a sun screen with an SPF ( Sun Protection Factor ) of 15 or greater , '' he said . `` It shows that it could happen to you . '' He also said it is an indication that there is still a great need for better educational programs warning about the dangers of the sun in this county of sunny beaches and endless summers . The melanoma center , which opened in 1986 at the UCI Clinical Cancer Center and is the only such center in Orange County , has started some educational programs for elementary school children , Cyril said . The American Cancer Society estimates that 60,000 people will develop skin cancer during 1990 , a 4 % increase from last year . Of those , 27,600 will be diagnosed with melanoma , the most serious form , and the Cancer Society estimates that 6,300 people will die from melanoma this year . That is why Matthews said he could not overstate the need for caution and prevention . The cancer center plans to offer another screening in the fall , he said , and he encouraged people in Orange County , especially those who engage in outdoor activity , to get themselves checked out . `` In my opinion it is related to the popularity of the masses going to the beach and other outdoor recreation as much as they have in the last few years , almost to a fanatic extreme , '' he said . `` Well , do n't say fanatic extreme , because I think outdoor recreation is great and good . But people should be prudent . '' But Dore Gilbert , a Newport Beach dermatologist , said he thinks people living along the coast are well-informed about the dangers of overexposure . The higher incidence of skin cancer and melanoma cases , he said , could reflect an increased awareness among people who are seeking medical help earlier , before it is too late . `` In this area , in Orange County and also in Los Angeles , people are very aware of melanoma , '' he said . `` If you get out to more rural areas , areas away from the coast , you are going to find more people who say , 'It ca n't happen to me . ' `` Those , he said , are the people to worry about .