Dorothy Wellborn Green -- better known as Dolly Green , the socialite , philanthropist and racing stable owner -- died Tuesday at her Bel-Air home after a long illness . An aide said Miss Green had requested that her age not be disclosed . Miss Green , the last surviving child of Beverly Hills founder and oil magnate Burton E. Green , bought into thoroughbred horse racing in an attention-getting way in 1980 when she spent $ 2.2 million for five yearlings at the Keeneland sale in Lexington , Ky. '' Oh , it was the most exciting thing , '' the irrepressible Miss Green later said of the auction . `` I could n't believe , after all these years , I was actually bidding on a horse . . . . Then to bid that kind of money for a horse . My , I did have some trepidations . '' Conceding that her only involvement with horse racing before that auction was attending races , Miss Green was initially considered a `` mystery woman '' in horse-racing circles . But she worked at her new interest , spending part of her profits from the $ 3.6-billion sale of her father 's Belridge Oil Co. to Shell Oil Co. in 1979 to build her stable of horses and hire top trainers and jockeys . At one point , she owned 74 Thoroughbreds . In 1986 , Miss Green 's filly , Brave Raj , won the $ 1-million Breeders ' Cup race for juvenile fillies at Santa Anita and was voted the Eclipse Award as champion 2-year-old . `` It was quick , short and wonderful , was n't it ? '' was her reaction to the victory run . In 1984 , Miss Green established the Dolly Green Equine Research Lab of the Southern California Equine Foundation in Hollywood Park . Miss Green had served as trustee of the Burton E. Green Foundation , which was set up in her father 's name after his death in 1965 at the age of 96 . Her own charities included endowment of the Dolly Green Scholars Award at UCLA 's Jules Stein Eye Institute . She was a former member of the Los Angeles Junior League and the advisory board of the Los Angeles Orphanage Guild . A popular socialite and hostess for six decades , Miss Green reportedly startled her socially prominent parents in her youth by refusing to be presented at a formal coming-out party . `` I wish to perfect myself in several studies . I would rather study languages , even law , if I could do so , in preference to a life of parties and dinners and teas , '' she said . Miss Green was an alumna of Marlborough School . Her late sister , Liliore Green Rains , who had no college education , left $ 240 million to Pomona College , Stanford University , Loyola Marymount University , Caltech and two hospitals , when she died in 1985 . Her other sister , Burton Bettingen , died in 1986 . Miss Green is survived by a niece and a nephew .