Valencia and El Dorado high schools , two teams going in opposite directions , met Friday night in their annual battle for Placentia bragging rights . The future is bright for Valencia , which defeated El Dorado , 35-0 , in front of 2,000 at Bradford Stadium . The Tigers have a 3-0 record and are quickly becoming a team to watch in the Orange County rankings . Meanwhile , the season is quickly taking on nightmarish overtones for El Dorado . The Golden Hawks were badly beaten for the third consecutive game Friday . In three games they have yet to score a touchdown or a field goal , and have been outscored , 130-2 . Valencia got off to a running start , scoring on three of its first four possessions and adding a fourth touchdown on a 34-yard fumble return by sophomore running back/defensive back Ryan Roskelly . With El Dorado on its 40-yard line , Roskelly scooped up an errant pitch on the dead run and raced untouched into the end zone . He also scored on runs of seven and 16 yards and John Fewell had a six-yard scoring run . By halftime it was 28-0 and El Dorado was running for cover . Fewell added a nine-yard touchdown run in the third quarter for the final margin . But make no mistake , it could have been worse . Valencia had one touchdown -- a one-yard run by Fewell -- called back because of a penalty and later fumbled away another chance at the El Dorado two-yard line . It was an impressive display by the Tigers nevertheless . `` We played pretty well , '' said Mike Marrujo , Valencia coach . `` We executed well . We wanted to make a point of getting better this week . '' The Tigers ' defense clobbered El Dorado running backs all game long and kept its passing game off balance with a heavy rush . The numbers tell the story : El Dorado had three first downs , minus-38 yards in offense and did not pass midfield . The Golden Hawks ' first first down came with 5 minutes 33 seconds left in the half and by then they trailed , 21-0 . `` Defense has been what 's won games for us for years , '' Marrujo said . Valencia was n't too shabby on offense either . The Tigers had 309 yards in offense , 133 on passes from quarterback Richard Wells . `` He 's played very well , very consistent , for us , '' Marrujo said of Wells , a senior who was a backup last season . Fewell , a junior , rushed for a game-high 77 yards in 14 carries and Sergio Ortiz and Roskelly added 32 and 30 yards , respectively . Next up for Valencia is Troy , which beat El Dorado , 46-0 , last week . Next for El Dorado is Fullerton and a hope that next week is the week the Golden Hawks can turn their season around .