Color of Money : Color copying machines are the fastest-growing segment of the office copier market . By 1994 , the number of color copiers installed nationwide is expected to grow to 178,000 , compared to 16,000 at the end of last year . Companies that stand to benefit include Mead Corp. , the paper-products manufacturer in Dayton , Ohio , and Colorocs Corp. of Georgia , which makes color copiers for engineering documents , real estate portfolios and advertising brochures . High costs remain a hindrance to the market 's growth , but industry insiders are confident that the market will grow as companies become more reliant on graphics to present their best side . Cleveland Plain Dealer Golden Screens : Despite a 10 % increase in gross box office receipts -- $ 5 billion last year , compared to $ 4.5 billion in 1988 -- competition among theaters is growing as the number of screens continues to soar . The United States alone has 23,132 first-run screens , up from 17,600 in 1980 . What are theaters doing to make themselves stand out ? Some are attracting families by offering morning movies in the summer and bargain rates before 6 p.m. Others are trying special promotions with local radio stations , sneak previews and special discounts to senior citizens and students . Special events , such as group rentals , also bring in good concession returns . Business First of Greater Columbus ( Ohio ) Finding Oil : Safety-Kleen Corp. of Elgin , Ill. , is investing $ 40 million in a plant to recycle motor oil . The plant , which will be located in East Chicago , Ind. , is billed as the largest in the world and is scheduled to be open in a year . It will refine 75 million gallons of used auto and industrial oil a year , producing 43 million gallons of lubricating oil and other petroleum products . The company plans to open another plant on the East Coast . Chicago Tribune Expansion Site : Best Buy , the Minneapolis-based electronics retailer , may make Dallas the site of its second distribution center as the chain expands into the Southeast to compete with the Circuit City and Highland chains . Currently , Best Buy distributes goods from Minneapolis , which works well for its 53 Midwestern stores . But the company recently opened three stores in the Dallas-Ft. Worth area , is in the process of building a fourth and has plans for outlets in Irving , Plano and Ft. Worth . Best Buy has leased warehouse and distribution space in Dallas . Dallas Business Journal