Japan 's powerful economic machine began to tone itself down in observance of the death of Emperor Hirohito , but its factories will continue to hum throughout a period of mourning that seems likely to have a largely cosmetic effect on global business . While movies were canceled on some Japanese airlines and flight attendants donned more conservative outfits , a 60-second period of meditation at Toyota 's domestic plants was timed to avoid any loss of production on the auto assembly lines . The chief economic impact could be felt in the travel industry , officials speculated , as both corporate and personal travel plans were being canceled or postponed for periods that range from a few days to two months . In some Japanese corporate board rooms , today was the `` X Day '' that had been anticipated ever since the emperor fell ill last fall . Contingency plans that business executives had previously refused to discuss were quickly put into effect . They included temporary suspensions of advertising campaigns in Japan and , to a small extent , in the United States ; a mandate for dark , conservative clothing , and an unofficial ban on entertainment , alcoholic drinks and social functions . But despite the long period of preparation for Hirohito 's death , the responses varied widely from company to company because it had been 62 years since the Japanese have had to so mark an end to an era . Many were unsure how to respond , and it was considered unseemly to plan for the death in any detail before it occurred . 'We Are an American Corporation ' '' This has not happened in the lifetime of most of the Japanese in our bank , '' Margaret Merrett , a spokeswoman for Sanwa Bank California , said Friday . `` The last time this occured before , they were n't born for the most part . So they do n't remember . This is a new experience for them . '' Meanwhile , Japan 's pervasive role in the world economy gives the emperor 's death a high visibility abroad -- a concern that Japan 's U.S. subsidiaries downplayed by stressing that they are U.S. firms . Officials of Japanese banks and securities firms , U.S. arms of Japanese auto firms , and other Japanese outposts in this country said it would largely be business as usual . `` We are an American corporation , we work on an American calendar and schedule , '' said Yutaka Nakai , general manager at the Los Angeles office of Daiwa Securities America . An exception : All Nippon Airways canceled the next three days of U.S. advertising , according to Kent Cooper , director of public relations at the Los Angeles office of Hokuhodo Advertising America . Hokuhodo is Japan 's second-largest advertising agency . ANA , one of the most Japanese of Japan 's airlines , also dusted off contingency plans that called for an end to in-flight movies for a week as well as the customary `` welcome drink '' for first-class and business-class customers , an airway spokesman said . And the chief steward was to exchange the usual orange uniform in favor of the more subdued blue outfit worn by the rest of the staff . Cooper said the cancellation of ANA 's domestic advertising -- compared to a planned seven-day suspension in Japan -- was implemented Friday under what was known internally as the `` Hirohito Ad Suspension Plan . '' For the thousands of Americans who do business with Japanese or work for them , the death of the emperor raised issues of protocol that brought forth this advice Friday : American business people should direct their condolences to the consul general of Japan in Los Angeles , Hiromoto Seki . The consulate office at 250 E. First St. , 12th floor , will receive condolences Monday through Thursday between 10 a.m. and 5 p.m. , where visitors may sign a book of mourning . Steve Clemmon , executive director of the Japan America Society of Southern California , said the main focus for condolences should be toward Japanese government representatives , beginning with the Consulate General . But Merrett of Sanwa Bank said it would be appropriate for American business people to express regrets to Japanese business people in writing or in person . `` There is nothing really set down as this is what you have to do , '' she said . In Japan , several major observances have been scheduled . For example , the Tokyo Stock Exchange 's normal half-day Saturday trading session was canceled , and officials were discussing whether to close the exchange on Monday as well , said Ken Suzuki , general manager at the Los Angeles office of Nikko Securities . Notified by Loudspeaker The fact that Hirohito 's death occurred as the weekend began will tend to minimize the disruption to the nation 's economic life , several executives said . Nissan and Toyota , the two biggest auto makers , planned full factory schedules even through the weekend . Employees arriving for work Saturday morning were notified at most companies by loudspeaker of the emperor 's death , and were asked to lower the national flags to half-staff and observe one minute of meditation . At Toyota , the observance was scheduled for 10 a.m. , a normal work break time , so that no factory production would be lost . Though the U.S. operations of Japanese firms were generally supposed to be unaffected , several companies said they will continue to observe a general ban on large parties and receptions . Some companies implemented the ban last September when Hirohito first became seriously ill. Merrett of Sanwa Bank said Sanwa will stay open as usual but will observe a 50-day mourning period during which there will not be any large parties or receptions . Also , senior officers in Japan will not likely leave Japan to visit the United States during this period , she said . The general slowdown of official economic activity in Japan will mean less travel within Japan and abroad , several executives said . Tourism is also likely to be affected . However , no dramatic impact was predicted . Gene Cotter , senior vice president of marketing for the Hawaii Visitors Bureau , said he thought the effect of reduced visits from Japanese tourists to his state `` will be minimal . '' He said older Japanese tourists -- who were close spiritually to the emperor -- may postpone trips for a while . But the bulk of Japanese tourists are younger and less likely to change their plans significantly , he said . In any event , he contended , the mourning period may be shorter than the traditional 49 days , since government officials were asking people to show `` restraint '' only over the next four or five days . Staff writers Bill Sing , George White , Linda Williams and Nancy Yoshihara contributed to this story .