SERIES Jane Curtin will headline her own NBC sitcom , `` The Jane Curtin Show , '' for the September television season , according to an NBC source . The show will explore the evolution of a romance between two divorced parents in the pressure-cooker of life in the '90s . Curtin was last seen on CBS ' `` Kate & Allie . '' USA Network has acquired broadcast rights to 201 episodes of `` Scooby-Doo , '' the popular children 's animated series from Hanna-Barbera , starring a mumbling Great Dane . The series , which premiered in 1969 , has been hailed as the longest-running animated series in television history . USA will air the cartoons on weekdays and Sunday , beginning September . MINISERIES Jackie Collins , the author of `` Hollywood Wives , '' has written the screen adaptation of her best-selling novels `` Chances '' and `` Lucky , '' combining them into a three-part , six-hour saga for NBC . The story is about the life of gangster Gino Santangelo and his strong-willed daughter Lucky . Production for the miniseries is getting under way now for broadcast in the 1990-91 season . Joanna Kerns from `` Growing Pains '' will star as a young seismologist who finds herself at odds with a city and her family when she comes to believe that a cataclysmic earthquake will strike Los Angeles within 10 days in `` The Great Los Angeles Earthquake . '' In the four-hour NBC miniseries , scheduled to air in 1990-91 , the city 's leaders fail to take action , Los Angeles is reduced to rubble and its population is decimated . MOVIES Ed Zwick and Marshall Herskovitz , creators of `` thirtysomething , '' are the executive producers of the NBC movie `` Home Video , '' a drama about a 15-year-old boy who , devastated by the accidental death of his mother , tries to make sense of his life by reviewing his childhood through home videos . The task brings him to the realization that his mother may have committed suicide . The movie , written by Herskovitz from a story he created with Zwick , is scheduled for the 1990-91 season . In the CBS movie `` Sail Away , '' Mark Linn-Baker and Lisa Hartman , a fast-track New York couple on vacation in the South Pacific , get shipwrecked on an idyllic island and encounter two other American castaways , played by Gregory Harrison and Charlotte Lewis . A romantic quadrangle develops , and the couples are forced to re-examine their relationships . The movie is now filming in the Virgin Islands for broadcast in the 1990-91 season . Anson Williams is the director and Mark Stein the writer of the NBC movie , `` Honey , Let 's Kill the Neighbors . '' Now in production , the film is a suburban comedy about a young couple who buy a kiddie-com for the baby 's room . When the device picks up the neighbors ' conversation about plotting a murder , the couple gets involved in an unexpected adventure . The story of Jimmy Capone , long-lost brother of infamous Al , is the subject of the TNT movie , `` The Lost Capone , '' starring Eric Roberts , Ally Sheedy and Adrian Pasdar . The movie , scheduled to air sometime this year , is a fictionalized account of the Capone brother who left home at an early age to escape `` the family business '' and then emerged 10 years later as a self-styled marshal , who unknowingly disrupted Al 's bootleg liquor business . SPECIALS Shelly Long is developing a project with Nickelodeon called `` Stories From Growing Up , '' in which celebrities will discuss and dramatize their personal childhood experiences . Three half-hour pilots , aimed to help boost children 's self-esteem , are scheduled for taping in the spring to air on Nickelodeon in the fall . Peter Billingsley is a small but bright 16-year-old whose father , a strapping ex-football player , just does n't understand him in `` The Fourth Man , '' a `` CBS Schoolbreak Special '' now in production . Billingsley knocks himself out physically to impress his dad , played by Tim Rossovich , who ignores his son 's more subtle accomplishments . Lyle Alzado , Adrienne Barbeau and Nicole Eggert co-star . NEWS From Sept. 3 to 7 , CBS News will focus on America 's growing education needs in a weeklong campaign titled , `` Project : Education . '' The programming includes a two-hour documentary hosted by Charles Kuralt , a national education conference in Washington , D.C. , a nationwide forum and ongoing news broadcasts focusing on education . CABLE Israel recently became the 21st country to get its MTV , as the cable music channel 's global network makes an attempt to expand into the Middle East . The move includes an initial distribution to 5,000 cable homes in three Israeli towns , and MTV projects 200,000 more households within the next two years . SOAPS '' Guiding Light '' is losing actor Carl Williams , who has decided to leave the show when his contract is up this month , but the part will be re-cast . Also the character of Justin Marler is set to return . A young protege of Justin 's , a surgeon named Daniel , will also be cast .