Debby Kyle 's worries began early in the 1980s , when financial giant Bank of America began an aggressive campaign to set up automated teller machines across the state , creating an electronic banking system that today boasts more than 1,500 ATMs . Kyle was then ATM director for La Jolla Bank & Trust , a mid-size bank with fewer than 10 ATMs . As Bank of America wooed more and more customers with the wonders and conveniences of its expansive electronic banking network , Kyle feared that her bank would get muscled out of the market . Like other small-bank managers , Kyle sought a strategy that would enable La Jolla Bank to compete with the banking giants in the Age of ATMs . That 's when Kyle realized she had to catch a rising STAR . La Jolla Bank & Trust signed up with STAR System , the San Diego-based electronic banking system that has become the West 's premier ATM network in less than five years . Since its incorporation in 1984 , STAR has been able to wrest electronic banking , once monopolized by industry giants , and offer it to small and mid-sized banks . Expanded Network Today , La Jolla Bank has 15 ATMs -- hardly enough to compete with Bank of America , Kyle concedes . But , with its STAR affiliation , La Jolla Bank customers can get cash at thousands of ATM sites in six Western states and Illinois , said Kyle , who is now vice president/director of training at La Jolla Bank . STAR has become the second-largest regional ATM network in the country by providing an accurate , reliable data-processing system to conduct electronic banking transactions . The STAR network now operates in California , Arizona , Hawaii , Illinois , Nevada , Oregon and Utah . STAR , a not-for-profit network founded by 11 banks and savings and loans in 1984 , had recruited 143 banks and S & Ls by the end of its first year of operation in 1985 . Now , STAR has 416 members . The number of ATMs in its system totals more than 7,600 , more than triple the 2,431 ATMs in the system four years ago . ATM cardholders in the STAR system now approach 19 million , up from 6.7 million in 1985 . The rapid growth of STAR has astonished many , but bankers and industry analysts say there 's no secret behind the network 's success : STAR has gained market dominance by recognizing and seizing a niche in the marketplace , offering quality service and paying attention to client needs . `` STAR has one of the highest up-times in the country , '' said David Robertson , vice president of the Nilson Report , a leading newsletter for the credit card and ATM industries , based in Santa Monica . Up-time refers to the time an ATM system is operating and not broken down . `` There 's nothing that upsets a customer more than , when he walks up to a machine and it 's shut down , '' Robertson said . `` You have a very competitive market , '' Robertson said . `` All the banks are staying open later , opening on weekends . They 're looking for a competitive edge . And that 's exactly what STAR offers . '' Which is why First Interstate Bank of Nevada announced last month that it is joining STAR . 'Expanded Access to Cash ' '' The idea behind it was to give our customers expanded access to their cash , '' said Graham McKenney , a First Interstate spokesman . `` STAR has had phenomenal growth , and we 'd like to take advantage of that . '' The Las Vegas-based bank is expected to add 132 ATMs and 250,000 cardholders to the network . Bankers disagree on whether electronic banking is profitable . Purchasing and installing one ATM costs nearly $ 40,000 , and maintenance and operating costs can range from $ 2,000 to $ 5,000 per month per machine . Still , banks and savings and loans say it is an essential service for customers . `` Whether you lose money on the machines is n't a factor , '' said Lynne Duke , manager of bank card services at La Mesa-based Grossmont Bank , another STAR affiliate . `` It 's something you have to offer to be competitive , '' she said , describing ATM service as a cost of doing business . According to Rita Champ , STAR vice president of marketing and communications , for each transaction conducted at a STAR ATM , the network charges the ATM card-issuing bank a set fee of 50 cents per withdrawal and 30 cents per balance inquiry . STAR also charges client banks an initial membership fee of $ 1,500 to $ 2,500 and annual dues of $ 1,000 to $ 2,250 . Those charges , however , are not necessarily passed along directly to cardholders . Some banks and S & Ls charge ATM transaction fees , and others have chosen not to . All fees paid by STAR clients go back into updating the system or for marketing and research , Champ said . Because STAR is not-for-profit , revenue surpluses result in the lowering of transaction fees , Champ added . Within the last 18 months , STAR has reduced its transaction fees three times . Although STAR achieved its success in part by offering competitive prices , the network 's rapid growth is primarily because it was the first network to seriously offer electronic banking to small financial institutions . While national networks , such as Cirrus and Plus , sought only to recruit big-name banks , STAR rushed to fulfill the smaller bank 's desire to grow . Luring Customers The major financial institutions were the first to realize that ATMs could lure more customers by offering 24-hour banking and the ability to get cash at many locations . With their considerable financial muscle , major institutions such as Bank of America and Security Pacific National Bank launched ATM expansion campaigns in the early 1980s , installing electronic tellers throughout the state . In the midst of the banks ' ATM buildup , national networks were also gaining prominence and seeking a foothold in the West Coast . In some cases , the national networks , eager to gain credibility and net as many customers as quickly as possible , offered electronic banking only to the biggest-name bank in a particular market , Champ said . For example , when Bank of America agreed to join Plus , the national network in return promised not to recruit a competitor in the same market . At the time , such exclusive agreements appeared to have given the banking powers a monopoly on electronic banking and threatened the smaller banks ' future . `` The big banks and the networks thought they were going to lock up the market , '' said Bill Haynor , first vice president of marketing at Great American First Savings , which was an original member of STAR . `` But what they did n't realize was that they created an opportunity for the small banks to get together and say , 'Hey , they locked us out . Why do n't we form our own network ? ' `` Four banks -- California First Bank ( now Union Bank ) , Lloyds Bank ( now Sanwa Bank ) , Bank of the West and American National Bank -- did exactly that by conceiving the STAR concept in 1984 . Then , the group recruited seven other well-recognized banks and savings institutions to join the original network . The fledgling network quickly bolstered itself as small and mid-sized banks that were shunned by the national networks flocked to join STAR . Offered a Service '' We were lucky because we were offering a service that was needed in the marketplace . . . a service that no one else was really offering , '' Champ said . `` Smaller banks were eagerly looking for a vehicle to expand their system without having to spend money on brick and mortar for new branches . We were that vehicle . '' Without having to ward off competitors ' challenges , STAR was able to focus on providing quality service in its early years . Backed by its founding members ' reputations and by paying attention to its members ' needs , STAR had little difficulty recruiting clients . Today , the network has more than 67 % of the state 's ATM base . `` It 's tough being the small guy , '' said Kyle of La Jolla Bank & Trust . `` The big banks always see their names in the headlines . We always get overlooked . But STAR has never made us feel like a small bank . They ask us for our opinions and pay as much attention to our needs as they do to the needs of their founding members . '' The STAR System also offered small bank managers a deal they could n't refuse . By joining the network , small banks could expand their operations , yet simultaneously reduce their need for more branch offices . `` Before ATMs , the only way you could expand was with brick and mortar , '' said Bob Plunkett , first vice president of the ATM department at San Diego Trust & Savings . `` But land in Southern California is so expensive . By joining STAR we 've been able to reduce the number of proposed branches because we can augment our current branches with off-site ATMS . '' A decade ago , San Diego Trust & Savings was building five new branches annually , according to Plunkett . Today , the bank constructs one or two new outlets each year . `` The slowdown is directly linked to our ATM growth , '' Plunkett said . `` It 's a lot cheaper this way . '' Name Recognition As STAR continued to lure members , the national networks recognized the flaws in its strategy to seek only the big-name banks , industry members say . But , by the time the national networks dropped their exclusive offers and opened electronic banking service to other institutions , STAR had gained dominance of the Western market . According to a consumer awareness study , STAR is the most-recognized electronic banking network in the state . Even the big banks are beginning to recognize the advantages of joining STAR . According to Robertson , vice president of the Nilson Report , STAR ensured its future over the last two years by recruiting Wells Fargo Bank and Bank of America . `` Getting those two was a major coup , '' Robertson said . `` The fact that STAR was able to crack that group , to persuade the big banks to join , shows just how strong it has become . '' Loraine Boland , vice president and manager of Wells Fargo 's ATM department , denied that her institution joined STAR because it felt threatened by the network 's growth . `` Since we had such a large ATM network of our own , we did n't feel a need to join early on , '' Boland said . San Francisco-based Wells Fargo is the third-largest financial institution in the state according to assets and has more than 1,200 ATMs . Although Wells Fargo has 455 branches in the state , it only has 18 offices in San Diego County . `` We joined recently because we knew STAR had a lot of ATMs in Southern California , '' Boland said . `` Most of our ATMs are in Northern California . We just wanted to give our customers in the southern part of the state the convenience of more ATMs . '' Besides offering their customers greater convenience by joining STAR , major banks that operate large numbers of ATMs can generate revenue by offering its machines to the network , said Champ of STAR . For example , any time a cardholder of Bank A uses an ATM at Bank B , the network pays Bank B a fee of $ .40 per withdrawal and $ .20 per balance inquiry . `` By opening our many ATM machines to other STAR members , we can generate revenue , '' said Brenda Yost , vice president of Bank of America 's electronic banking department . The San Francisco-based bank is the state 's largest financial institution according to assets and operates more than 1,500 ATMs . Although STAR brings money into the institutions , bankers say more money goes out to pay the network 's transaction fees . For example , in order to offset the network 's transaction fees and pay for the cost of ATM operations , some banks charge its customers a fee each time they use their ATM card at Bank B . Not all banks assess such fees , but those that do typically charge 50 cents to $ 1 . 'Does n't Make Any Sense ' '' Here we are trying to persuade more people to use their ATM cards , '' said Kyle of La Jolla Bank , which does not charge its customers fees when they conduct transactions at other STAR machines . `` We pour money into ATM advertising campaigns . Then , we do a complete about face and charge them when they use their ATMs . That does n't make any sense . '' Kyle says she understands banks ' desire to offset operational costs , but criticizes them for not understanding the savings that electronic banking offers . `` Sure , if you just look at transaction fees we 're losing money , '' Kyle said . `` But consider how much more it would cost us to handle all the ATM transactions annually . The cost of more staffing , the cost of statement processing . And , if you took away our ATMs , consider the impact it would have on our customer service . If you want to talk about losing money , let 's start with how many accounts we would lose if we lost our ATMs . '' STAR would prefer to see banks drop such charges to foster greater ATM usage , but the network has no control over that decision . `` Those charges are not imposed by STAR , '' Champ said . `` They 're set by the individual banks . We ca n't try to regulate what they do . That 's against antitrust laws . '' Although STAR officials were concerned that bank charges might deter customers from using ATMs , they said steady growth has assuaged such fears . `` I ca n't tell you how many people are not using ATMs because of the charges , '' Champ said . `` If there were no charges , maybe our volume would be higher . But we do n't think it would be that much more . We 're happy with our growth . '' Although STAR will welcome banks that want to join the network , Champ said seeking new members is not first on STAR 's agenda . Nor does STAR plan to become a national network . `` We 've been so successful because we can focus on a local market , '' Champ said . `` We know who our customers are , what they need . We could never do that if we had to pay attention to 50 different markets across the country . '' Instead , STAR wants to make bank customers aware of electronic banking 's benefits and increase ATM usage . STAR , like other ATM networks , is exploring how to get more out of its system : using ATM cards to buy groceries , movie tickets , gasoline . `` When the ATM was first introduced , we marketed the card to be used for one purpose only : to get emergency cash quick , '' Champ said . `` Card transactions have increased tremendously because now we 're taking the approach that the customer can use the card anytime . The best way we can grow is if we can convince the cardholder to use the card more often , for various purposes . ''