Fourteen years after the breakup of Return to Forever , guitarist Al DiMeola still misses being a member of the seminal electric jazz band led by Chick Corea . DiMeola , in fact , still harbors hopes of a reunion with former band mates Corea , the piano and keyboard player , drummer Lenny White and bassist Stanley Clarke . `` It was the most ridiculous thing for Chick to ever break up the group , '' said DiMeola , who plays the Bacchanal at 8:30 Monday . `` I have expressed this to Chick , and I know Stanley and Lenny feel strongly , too . I 've met with Chick , and Stanley 's met with him . We 've tried to talk sense into him , but I think we have a Scientology problem to deal with , possibly due to Stanley leaving Scientology . That does n't sit very well with Chick . '' Corea is an acknowledged devotee of the self-improvement movement founded by the late L. Ron Hubbard . When Clarke gave up Scientology , Corea broke up the group after the `` Romantic Warrior '' album . `` We had signed a multimillion-dollar deal with CBS , but Chick decided to go in a different direction , '' DiMeola said . His disappointment is understandable . He has n't recorded on his own since the 1987 album `` Tirami Su . '' `` It 's very strange . I 've talked to labels like GRP , and I have n't gotten a response at all . Which is bizarre . All I can tell you is that the majority of what I 've heard coming from that label is extremely boring . I have a demo worth of material which is as strong or stronger than anything I 've ever done , and I 've sold close to 5 million records . I 'm right up there with some of the best-selling jazz artists around -- worldwide . '' DiMeola is playing San Diego with his World Sinfonia , a quartet also including classical guitarist Chris Carrington and percussionists Arto Tuncboyaci and Gumbi Ortiz . `` I heard Chris 10 years ago at a club in Dallas , and I always had it in mind to do something with him . The magic in this particular group is the spontaneity . We leave lots of room for improvisation , and we have a real good rapport , especially with the percussionists . '' The songs are mostly DiMeola 's , but the group also tackles DiMeola 's arrangements of other pieces . In November , DiMeola plans to hit the road with a new electric band . The group will hone material for an album he hopes to record by year 's end . The flip side of DiMeola is guitarist Larry Carlton , who has a seven-album deal with GRP . Carlton 's career spans more than 20 years of solo projects and prodigious studio work with Quincy Jones , Michael Jackson , John Lennon , Jerry Garcia , Neil Diamond , Dolly Parton and Linda Ronstadt , mostly during the early '70s . And of course there was his tenure with The Crusaders , the funky jazz band , from 1971 to 1977 . Carlton 's album `` Collection , '' released this year , is a compilation of 20 years of his music , including such signature tunes as `` Nite Crawler '' and `` Minute by Minute . '' He said he plans to play many of his light-jazz radio hits in San Diego next Wednesday night during shows at 6 and 8:30 . Guitar virtuoso Stanley Jordan , whose patented `` tapping '' technique wows listeners , will share the bill . By tapping the strings with the fingers of both hands , an effect which almost makes the guitar a keyboard instrument , Jordan gets a symphonic sound which seems impossible from a single human being . The concert will be a homecoming for San Diego saxophonist Hollis Gentry , who left his local band Neon to join Carlton 's band last year . Flutists have seldom made it big as leaders , but Dave Valentin seems a rare exception to the rule . 'If you look back historically at flute players , you 'll find Eric Dolphy , James Moody , Yusef Lateef , Hubert Laws and Herbie Mann , not necessarily in that order . Many , like Moody and Dolphy , doubled on saxophones . But I think Herbie Mann was able to make the flute a legitimate lead instrument . `` Naturally , I 'm an aggressive player . But I would like to show the public that the flute has a whole texture of colors and sounds . '' Valentin and his group stop at Elario 's Monday and Tuesday nights for shows at 8:30 and 10:30 as part of a West Coast tour . After all this talk about GRP , it 's worth noting that Valentin was the first artist signed to the label 11 years ago . Last week marked the start of the U.S. Grant Hotel 's push to become a hot social spot for downtowners . The effort includes frequent jazz as part of a new entertainment program in the Grant Lounge . Friday nights from 5 to 9 this month , Tobacco Road plays `` vintage jazz . '' Mondays , same hours , it 's South Market Street , and Tuesday nights , the a cappella trio Pieces , from 5 to 7 . RIFFS : Pianist Kenny Barron , a masterful technician whose bright , inventive style has been called `` coruscating , '' opened two weeks at Elario 's last night . . . . The Kingston Hotel ( 1055 1st Ave. ) continues its series of Thursday night jazz concerts through August with 8-to-midnight performances by Tobacco Road plus different special guests each week . . . . Singer Anita O'Day is the star of KPBS-TV 's `` Club Date '' program airing Saturday night at 11 , repeating Monday night at 11:30. . . . Coast Highway plays jazz outdoors in Carlsbad 's Magee Park ( Carlsbad Boulevard and Beech Street ) Friday night from 6 to 8. . . . Jimmy and Jeannie Cheatham appear for twilight jazz at Del Mar 's Powerhouse Park , across from the train station at 7 p.m. Monday .