The Scene : The U.S. premiere of Pedro Almodovar 's `` Tie Me Up ! Tie Me Down ! , '' a last-minute addition to the American Film Institute Film Festival , Thursday at the Cineplex Odeon Century Plaza . For the uninitiated , the movie , steeped in controversy , was awarded an X rating by the Motion Picture Assn . of America , but Almodovar refused to recut the scenes in question and chose to release the movie unrated . ( It opens at the Goldwyn Pavilion Friday . ) After gorging on screen sex , drugs and violence on screen , filmgoers partied at the Twenty 20 Club . The Buzz : No , it was n't about the rating or what Almodovar calls `` the moment '' which generated the original X , but about the film 's content -- the story of an actress who is kidnaped , beaten and held captive by a mental patient and then falls madly in love with him . Quoted : `` Oh , it 's a fun-loving , cute , adorable rape fantasy . I think it 's pretty morally questionable , '' said actor Barry Miller , of TV 's `` Equal Justice . '' Overheard : `` This movie actually says worse things about women than 'Pretty Woman . ' `` Understated : `` I feel misunderstood , '' said Almodovar . Who Was There : `` Tie Me Up ! '' stars Antonio Banderas and Loles Leon , Miramax Films ( the movie 's distributor ) executives Harvey and Bob Weinstein and Russell Schwartz , your usual assortment of agents , film production and studio executives , plus a few strange-looking performance artists . Dress Code : For both sexes , dark suits worn with T-shirts or shirts buttoned up to the top button . No one asked , but actress/model Lauren Hutton volunteered that hers was Armani . Chow : A large X-shaped chocolate cake with marzipan fruit on top , as well as canapes and other desserts . People drank Calistoga water , diet Coke , and Absolut vodka sometimes straight , sometimes with juice . Exit Line : From an anonymous , youngish male agent -- `` This is not the kind of movie this town thrives on , but it 's well made . Hollywood is about dollars and this is n't a movie about dollars , it 's about real visionary movie-making skills . ''