American Savings Bank , the successor firm to troubled American Savings & Loan , has cut the interest rates it pays on deposits to bring them more into line with its large California competitors , the head of the company said Thursday . Mario J. Antoci , American Savings Bank 's new chief executive , said average interest rates on deposits have been lowered by two-tenths of a percentage point in the last three weeks -- a move that he said led to only a small loss in savings even though rates in general were rising . American Savings has $ 13.2 billion in deposits . Antoci 's moves at American Savings Bank are being followed closely by his competitors , especially in the intensely competitive area of deposits . Interest on deposits account for most of any thrift 's expenses . 'We Applaud It ' Hobbled by deposit outflows sparked by large losses , American Savings & Loan often paid high rates for savings because it needed the money to maintain its liquidity . That , in turn , angered its rivals , which had to raise their rates to meet the competition . `` Any step to have a more rational pricing for deposits is a good move and we applaud it , '' Keith Russell , president of Glendale Federal Savings , said . Antoci 's remarks , made to reporters in Los Angeles , are part of his campaign to convince the public that American Savings is now a healthy and responsible financial institution , free of the financial turmoil that had buffeted the firm since 1984 . Texas tycoon Robert M. Bass bought the company Dec. 28 . `` This is a new company , '' Antoci said . `` It 's not the old American . . . . That 's the message I 've got to get out . '' At the time of the sale to Bass , Stockton-based American Savings & Loan was divided into two financial institutions in a move that placed the healthy loans and stable deposits into a separate company known as American Savings Bank . The problem assets and unstable deposits were placed in another thrift known as New West Federal Savings , also being run by Antoci . 'Modest ' Asset Growth In other remarks , Antoci said : * American Savings ' assets would not grow at all in 1989 and only `` modestly '' in 1990 . Thereafter , he said , he expects the thrift to grow at a rate of about 8 % a year . American Savings Bank has about $ 15.7 billion in assets . * The company is looking for a location in Orange County or Los Angeles County to consolidate its far-flung Southern California operations . American Savings has major offices in Sherman Oaks , Irvine , Fullerton and Whittier . The headquarters will stay in Stockton . * American Savings will keep its lending simple , making mostly single-family mortgage loans that have adjustable rates . The company will , however , make a small number of loans on multifamily dwellings and fixed-rate loans , he said .