Ginetta Sagan , a former Nazi prisoner who on Thursday received Chapman College 's Albert Schweitzer Award for her international human rights work , said in an interview that people throughout the world should protest the human rights violations of Iraqi President Saddam Hussein . `` Saddam Hussein has not only killed and tortured political opponents who he knows are political opponents , but he has gone even further , and anyone who is even remotely suspected of being an opponent faces destruction , '' she said . `` He is a brutal human being ; he is a tyrant . '' Sagan said people should write or telegram the United Nations Commission on Human Rights to protest Hussein 's actions . She said that basic human rights , not world politics , are the issue . Sagan also denounced Hussein 's holding of civilian hostages in the current Mideast crisis . `` What he is doing violates international law , '' she said . `` People should speak up about these violations of human rights . They should stand up and be counted . '' Sagan , 65 , who lives in Atherton , Calif. , helped launch the human rights organization Amnesty International on the West Coast . She also started her own human rights group , based in Atherton , called the Aurora Foundation . Sagan 's feelings for political prisoners comes from firsthand experience . During World War II , she was captured by the Nazis and tortured for being an Italian Resistance fighter . She was to be executed but was rescued in 1945 . Since regaining her freedom 45 years ago , Sagan has devoted her life to freeing people around the world who have been jailed and tortured for their beliefs . Chapman College on Thursday honored her work by presenting her with its annual Schweitzer award . Schweitzer , who died in 1965 , was a philosopher , physician and missionary who won the 1952 Nobel Peace Prize for his international humanitarian work . Kurt Bergel , director of the college 's Albert Schweitzer Institute , told the student-faculty audience that Sagan was `` a woman who for a lifetime has stood in the forefront of the fight for human rights . '' Upon receiving the award , Sagan said , `` I accept this award , not only for myself , but on behalf of my co-workers in Amnesty International worldwide , who are working relentlessly in behalf of prisoners of conscience . Thank you . '' Later , Sagan stressed that her comments about Hussein and the Mideast crisis were her personal views . `` I am not speaking for Amnesty International , and I must make that clear , '' she said . But she added that as an individual human rights worker , she is appalled at the `` nightmare '' conditions in Iraq under Hussein 's rule . Sagan added , `` Iraq for years , as far as violating human rights , has been a nightmare . '' Sagan will be the initial speaker at 1 p.m. today as Chapman College launches its two-day convocation on `` The Relevance of Albert Schweitzer 's Life and Thought Today . '' Sagan , whose topic will be `` My Struggle for Human Rights , '' will speak in the Waltmar Theatre on the Chapman College campus , 333 N. Glassell St. At 7:30 tonight in the college 's Memorial Hall Auditorium , there will be a concert , followed immediately by a talk by British author James Brabazon on `` Reverence for Life and the Power of the Individual : Albert Schweitzer as a Guide for Today and Tomorrow . '' Brabazon , of London , is the author of a Schweitzer biography . On Saturday at 9 a.m. in Waltmar Theatre , Robert Livingstone , of International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War , will speak on `` Approaches to World Peace . '' All sessions today and Saturday are free and open to the public .