Six years after passage of a pioneering law aimed at providing drugs for rare diseases , up to 20 million Americans still face often insurmountable obstacles in having their diseases diagnosed and treated , a federal commission reported today . The problem is no longer a simple absence of drugs , the National Commission on Orphan Diseases found . Instead , medical care is hampered by uninformed physicians , a paucity of research and the unwillingness of some insurers to pay for treatment . `` If you do n't have a mainstream medical disease , you are in big trouble today , '' said Andrea Hecht , a Los Angeles County woman with a rare condition called Cushing 's syndrome. `` . . . Every American should look at this ( issue ) as something that they have a stake in . '' The commission was formed by Congress in 1985 to examine the medical care of patients with rare diseases -- some 5,000 known conditions ranging from various cancers to Tay-Sachs disease and cystic fibrosis , each affecting fewer than 200,000 Americans . Among the commission 's findings : * One in seven of the 801 patients with rare diseases surveyed by the commission said it took them six or more years to have their disease accurately diagnosed . Nearly a third of the patients surveyed said it took them between one and five years . * Nine percent of the patients had no health insurance ; another 7 % had inadequate insurance . Patients with rare diseases `` are often uninsurable because third-party payers lack information about their disease or will not insure pre-existing conditions . '' * Insurers often refuse to cover the costs of experimental treatments -- sometimes the only available therapy for people with rare diseases . Or , they refuse to reimburse for marketed drugs and devices not approved specifically for use against rare conditions . * More than half of the $ 1.3 billion spent by the federal government on rare-disease research in fiscal 1987 was spent on about 200 rare forms of cancer , leaving just $ 640 million for the remaining 4,800 other rare diseases . `` The public 's fear of a disease governs where biomedical research money is spent , '' said Abbey Meyers , a commission member and executive director of the National Organization for Rare Disorders . `` The more the public fears a disease , the more funding it gets . '' The commission concluded : '' Information of all kinds , for patients and their families , physicians , researchers , insurers , and the public is lacking or poorly disseminated . . . In short , the needs of patients with rare diseases are not being adequately met . '' Andrea Hecht 's case , as she recounted it to The Times , is a typical example . A 36-year-old president of a public relations firm in Sherman Oaks , Hecht first developed symptoms of her disease in 1976 . Newly married and new to California , she began losing strength in her legs . Within months , she could not swing her legs out of a car . Disease Takes Toll Her body temperature and blood pressure went out of whack . She gained 75 pounds , her skin broke out , purple streaks appeared under her arms . Again and again , physicians failed to diagnose her problem . They gave her hormone shots , diuretics , creams for her skin . After two years , a doctor finally recognized Hecht 's condition as Cushing 's syndrome , which results from an excess of certain hormones secreted by the adrenal gland . The cause of the disease can be tumors of either the adrenal gland or the pituitary gland . Surgeons removed Hecht 's adrenal glands -- a treatment that stopped her symptoms but reduced her ability to fight infections . For the next nine years , Hecht resumed a relatively normal life -- until one day in 1987 she began losing peripheral vision . The problem was traced to a tumor on Hecht 's pituitary gland ; it was impinging on her optic nerve , Hecht says . The tumor , which was removed , turned out to have been the cause of Hecht 's disease . The removal of her adrenal glands had been unnecessary , she says . `` People believe that whatever goes wrong with their body , their local doctor is going to know what it is and know the latest treatment , '' said Hecht , who has since founded the National Cushing 's Assn . `` That is the biggest myth that the American public has been sold . '' Recommendations to Congress The federal commission 's 54 recommendations to Congress include establishment of a federal office to oversee issues concerning rare diseases , increased research funding and efforts to ensure that insurance plans do n't discriminate against people with rare diseases . `` Some of the problems are unique to people with rare diseases , '' Rep. Henry A. Waxman ( D-Los Angeles ) , a sponsor of the 1983 Orphan Drug Act , said of the commission 's findings . `` But other problems , such as insurance , are not unique . '' The Orphan Drug Act established incentives for pharmaceutical companies to develop products to treat rare diseases . Waxman said the commission grew out of the realization that the difficulties of people with rare diseases extend beyond a lack of available drugs .