Membership has its privileges , but maybe ownership has more . Even as the British marketing firm WPP Group raised its offer for Ogilvy Group to about $ 800 million Monday , word also surfaced on Wall Street that long-time client American Express may have talked with Ogilvy officials about buying the ad firm . Officials from Ogilvy and American Express refused to comment on that Monday . Ogilvy closed at $ 52 a share in over-the-counter trading Monday , up $ 2.125 from Friday 's close . The new WPP offer , at $ 50 per share , was up from the previous $ 45 per share the company offered slightly more than one week ago . Ogilvy officials were not willing to comment on speculation from Wall Street analysts that American Express had shown interest in purchasing its ad agency of 17 years . `` We 've had a lot of expressions of interest , '' said Joele Frank , an Ogilvy spokeswoman . `` I can not comment on any of them . '' American Express executives also were mum . `` We can not comment on speculation , '' said Lawrence A. Armour , senior vice president of corporate communications at American Express . The New York-based company 's chairman , James D. Robinson , was in Hong Kong on Monday , meeting with officials from the Travel Related Services division of American Express . He also was unavailable for comment . American Express is linked to Ogilvy in more ways than its advertising . The New York investment firm , Shearson Lehman Hutton , is 62 % owned by American Express . And Shearson has been acting as one of Ogilvy 's principal Wall Street advisers since WPP made its initial offer for Ogilvy . Wall Street analysts say it would be an extremely unusual setup for a client to own its advertising agency . But one top advertising analyst , who asked not to be named , said : `` There 's no reason why something like this ca n't work . Everyone knows Ogilvy wants to be bought by anyone but WPP . '' In fact , said the analyst , `` In Europe , situations where clients own their agencies are increasingly common . '' American Express is Ogilvy 's largest client , and has been with the firm since 1962 . Last year , American Express posted net income of $ 773 million on revenue of about $ 7.4 billion . Meanwhile , a WPP spokesman also declined to comment on the possibility of competing against American Express for Ogilvy . But a statement from WPP said that its new offer was made `` to avoid unnecessary and potentially unsettling delay in the negotiation of a friendly transaction . ''