Life-threatening shock after bacterial infections occurs because a natural protein in the blood helps bacterial toxins bind to a specific site on the wall of infection-fighting cells , researchers in San Diego and New York have found . The findings suggest earlier ways in which doctors might eventually be able to block the cascade of chemical reactions that lead to septic shock . `` We hope that whatever basic research we 've done will provide new opportunities for therapy in a disease where effective therapy has not been available , '' said Richard J. Ulevitch , a biochemist at the Research Institute of Scripps Clinic . `` The type of work that 's required to take this research to a therapeutic stage is pretty clear now . '' Ulevitch was the chief author on one of two papers delineating the findings , which are published in today 's edition of the journal Science . The lead author on the companion paper was Samuel Wright , a cell biologist at Rockefeller University in New York City . Others involved in the work at Scripps were John Mathison , Peter Tobias and Dr. Ralph Schumann . Collaborators elsewhere included R.A. Ramos at Rockefeller ; and S.R . Leong , G.W . Flaggs and P.W . Gray at Genentech Inc. in San Francisco . Septic shock occurs in 50,000 to 100,000 Americans every year , said Dr. John Harlan , chief of hematology at the University of Washington Medical School . It can occur after a primary bacterial infection or a secondary infection acquired after a patient has been hospitalized for cancer , AIDS , trauma or surgery . Characterized by plummeting blood pressure and organ failure , septic shock almost invariably leads to death once it reaches the advanced stages , Harlan said . `` It 's a big problem , '' Harlan said . `` So any intervention that would reduce mortality is welcome . '' Molecular-level studies over the last few years have shown that , in infection with certain kinds of common bacteria , septic shock occurs because of endotoxins , fat-sugar molecules from the bacteria 's cell wall , Ulevitch explained . This leads to an overabundance of a natural inflammatory chemical , tumor necrosis factor ( TNF ) . A little bit of TNF at an infection site helps the body fight off the infection ; too much produces septic shock . But it was not until the Scripps/Rockefeller research published today that two key events preceding the release of TNF were known : * For the endotoxin to do its damage , it must first be bound chemically to a natural protein in the blood , which the researchers named lipopolysaccharide binding protein . * After they bind together , the combination molecule attaches to the outside of infection-fighting monocyte cells via a protein structure known as CD14 . The function of this CD14 `` receptor '' protein had not been known before now . It is groundbreaking work to find out what such receptors do in the body , noted Ian Trowbridge , an immunologist at the Salk Institute in San Diego . `` A lot of these ( receptor ) molecules were characterized on the basis of structure and were thought to be important , but the real key over the last couple of years has been to try to find out what these molecules do , '' Trowbridge said . `` And this is another example of something that 's clearly of tremendous functional importance . '' Currently , there are clinical trials of drugs that would block TNF released by the body in response to bacterial endotoxins , Harlan noted . However , it would be better to block the process at a point before TNF is produced at all , he said . The Scripps/Rockefeller work provides a preliminary target for a mechanism to do this , by using proteins called monoclonal antibodies to block either the lipopolysaccharide binding protein or the CD14 receptor itself . Finding effective ways to deal with septic shock is increasing in importance because of a marked increase over the last decade in septicemia , accumulation of bacteria in the blood that can lead to septic shock . In 1979 , fewer than 10 % of infectious disease patients released from hospitals in the United States had a septicemia diagnosis . By 1987 , that had risen to 25 % , according the U.S. Centers for Disease Control . Ulevitch said his current work is being watched closely by Johnson & Johnson Co. , which has an option on marketing rights to certain research developed at Scripps . But much of the basic science leading up to the current work was done under National Institutes of Health grants going as far back as 1974 . His research group first described the lipopolysaccharide binding protein in 1986 , although its function was not then known , he said .