A study of women with radically different sex lives -- prostitutes and monogamous Indians -- has found new evidence linking promiscuity to transmission of a virus that can cause cervical cancer . Dr. Jose Azocar compared pap smear samples from the prostitutes with those of Piaroa women , part of a strictly monogamous group living in villages scattered in this South American nation 's Amazon jungle . `` With this study the relation between the HPV virus and cervical cancer is strengthened , as is the hypothesis that the mode of transmission is sexual , '' said Azocar , a virologist with the Venezuelan Scientific Research Institute . As early as the 1950s scientists observed that higher levels of cervical cancer seemed to be associated with promiscuity . A solid link between the human papilloma virus ( HPV ) and cervical cancer was n't made until the early 1980s by Harald Zur Hausen of Germany and Ralph Richart of Columbia University . Using genetic engineering to manipulate infected DNA , they found that the viruses most related to cervical cancer were certain strains of HPV . Later research using genetic material from the viruses confirmed their results . In 1985 , Azocar began a similar study using viral genetic material in cell samples from Caracas hospitals and found that nearly 80 % of cervical cancers in Venezuela were associated with HPV . Cancer is the No . 2 killer in Venezuela , and cervical cancer is the most common form in women . `` It is widely accepted among scientists that HPV causes cervical cancer , but it is thought that other factors are involved , including many births , early onset of sexual activity and promiscuity . I wanted to see to what point these other factors were involved , '' Azocar said in a recent interview . Further study required control groups at the extremes of sexual activity . `` It 's hard to find a control group of monogamous people , and with the Piaroa the girls are married off for life as soon as they get their first period , '' Azocar said . `` The only thing they required was that all the examinations be done by women gynecologists . '' Getting to the Piaroa , who had participated in an earlier AIDS study , was difficult . The 7,000-member tribe lives in an area the size of Austria roughly between the Parguaza River in southwest Bolivar State and the town of Tama-Tama in Amazonas Federal Territory . Most still live in villages of less than 100 . They fish , hunt small animals and birds and cultivate tubers and bananas , as they have for hundreds of years . Those in less remote villages may have outboard motors for their canoes and wear Western-style clothes , but their limited exposure to modern society ensures that their monogamous life style is intact . Men of status may have two wives , but most have only one . There is no one from outside the village to fool around with , and tribal women are kicked out if they sleep with someone other than their husbands . Azocar and his colleagues were flown by army helicopter to three villages near the Parguaza River , 290 miles south of Caracas , where they took samples from 125 women . No evidence of HPV or cervical cancer was found . Promiscuous Group Examining a promiscuous group was easier . He conducted a two-month campaign among prostitutes in several cities nearest Piaroa territory for a cervical screening program and free treatment . Police helped spread the word . A team of gynecologists took pap smears from 130 prostitutes . Between 25 % and 40 % , depending on the city they lived in , had HPV , and among these there was a high incidence of different grades of precancerous tumors . Both the Piaroa and prostitutes began having sex early , had multiple births , have similar blood lines , live in the same climate , eat similar foods and are exposed to roughly the same frontier-style living conditions . `` We showed that women who had many children and who started sex at an early age did n't necessarily have HPV , '' Azocar said . `` This provides solid data that cervical cancer is a sexually transmitted disease -- that the virus is the most important factor causing it and that promiscuity is the form of infection . ''