Lonnie Summers , now 73 , does n't step up to the plate anymore . Or squat behind it and flash signals to the pitcher . But when the former catcher and batting champion picked up a bat in the living room of his Inglewood home the other day , he instinctively held it up as if ready to take a cut . `` Wait a minute , '' he said in the middle of a conversation about the good old days , disappearing into another room . He came back with a team photo , disappeared again and returned with a huge stack of tattered newspaper clippings from decades ago . The mementos , and the memories they evoked , had not been hauled out for a while . Things were different during his years behind the plate , Summers recalled . Baseball was tougher , both on and off the field . The bus rides were long ; the pay was low . And , oh yeah , blacks played on different ball diamonds from whites . Summers , an Oklahoma native who hung up his glove in 1954 , is one of an estimated 140 survivors of the Negro Leagues , the sole professional baseball forum for blacks in the United States before Branch Rickey , general manager of the Brooklyn Dodgers , began the integration of the major leagues by signing Jackie Robinson in 1945 . `` Lonnie was one of those big , strong ballplayers who hit powerful line drives , '' said Chico Renfroe , an Atlanta-based sportswriter . `` He hit some of the most screaming line drives you 've seen in your life . '' Renfroe , himself a former Negro League player , said it was only `` Father Time that kept ( Summers ) from joining Jackie in the majors . '' Summers ' professional career began in the late 1930s , when he played for the Baltimore Elite Giants in the Negro Leagues for a few years . Then , for the next decade and a half , he played on teams in Puerto Rico , Mexico and various South American countries before returning to the Negro Leagues ' Chicago American Giants . He ended his career playing in a semi-professional integrated league based in San Diego . Summers , whose wife died recently , said it had been a long time since he 'd thought about his glory days -- the game in Mexico in which he batted in 11 runs , or the Negro League All-Star game at Chicago 's Comiskey Park in which he played with Junior Gilliam , a star second baseman for the Baltimore Elites who later signed with the Dodgers and become rookie of the year in the majors in 1953 . Baseball was not on Summers ' mind , he said , when he received a phone call last month inviting him to receive a plaque from the Inglewood City Council . The recognition was part of a nationwide program organized by Renfroe and sponsored by the Southern Bell telephone company of Atlanta to ensure that young people do not forget the trailblazers of the Negro League . `` It 's a part of history , and they 're dying off so fast , '' Renfroe said . `` People still tell me they did n't know there was a separate league for blacks . '' Baseball could be an especially grueling game back then , Summers said . `` I once played a double-header in Chicago , rode all night to Philadelphia ( on the team bus ) to play one game and then headed out that day to play in Chicago again . After you took a shower , you sometimes did n't even have time to get something to eat before the bus left . '' Teams sometimes played three games a day and eight in a weekend . To pass the time on the rickety buses , team members played checkers , slept , gossiped or took turns driving . When the team finally reached its destination , there were segregated hotels , restaurants and water fountains to contend with . Renfroe said gas-station water fountains marked `` Colored '' had lukewarm water , but the ones marked `` White '' offered cold water . The team members could not drink from the cold fountain , but they sometimes surreptitiously filled a container with the cold water and drank it on the bus . Once , Summers recalled , he and his teammates entered a packed restaurant in Detroit after a game and were told by the manager that the eating establishment was closed . But it 's full , they protested . It 's closed , the manager insisted . They ate down the street . Summers said black team members knew to stay out of certain parts of town . Meanwhile , the routine of playing and quickly moving on to the next game kept racial incidents to a minimum , he said . It was a love of baseball that kept players going , Summers said , not huge salaries . He earned $ 250 a month when he started , with a $ 2-a-day eating allowance for out-of-town games . The salary improved when he crossed the border to play in Mexico , but even then he earned less than his white teammates . Summers would not criticize the high salaries being paid his contemporary counterparts , saying they deserve what they are getting . He added , however , that ballplayers today do not appear to enjoy the game as much as Negro League players did . Summers said getting a chance to play in the majors did not prey on his mind during his career . Negro League baseball was highly competitive ; its teams frequently beat major league teams in exhibition games . `` I played against the best and with the best , '' he said . But looking back , Summers said he does sometimes feel that he was cheated out of the big time . Once Robinson broke the color line , younger Negro Leaguers such as Willie Mays , Roy Campanella , Ernie Banks and Hank Aaron went to the majors . `` It just shows that we could have done it all along , '' Summers said . `` I missed out on a lot , '' he said . `` I had an excellent arm in my prime , and as far as hitting and catching and running was concerned , I knew I could play . The thing was getting the break . `` I think the game of baseball owes us something . But I would never bring it up because I know the first thing they 're going to say : 'Why should we give you something when you did n't make it ? You did n't make it . ' `` Summers moved to Los Angeles after he left baseball and became a janitor in Los Angeles schools . He retired in the mid-1980s after 29 1/2 years on the job . Baseball , once his obsession , has lost some of its charm as the years have passed . Summers has been invited to Dodger Stadium as a dignitary but has turned down the offer . He still occasionally gets to the ballpark but prefers to sit by himself in the bleachers . `` If I go to the ballpark now , I do n't let anyone know I 'm there , '' he said . `` I go to watch the game , not to celebrate anything . '' Summers had second thoughts about receiving the plaque from Inglewood but finally decided to accept it . Now , next to the team pictures and other baseball photos lining the walls of his home is a fancy proclamation . `` Read it , '' he says . `` It 's all true . '' `` These players , '' it says , `` endured countless miles on the road , accommodations which were less than accommodating ( and ) pay which was no reflection of their talents and efforts . The strides made , the trails blazed , the sacrifices endured . . . and the heights reached will forever maintain their place in history . ''