An undercover horse the FBI used in an investigation of race-fixing at Finger Lakes Race Track won at least one race and finished strongly in others , much to the surprise of the agents . The FBI bought the horse thinking it would perform badly and could become involved in a fixed-race scheme . But the horse ran consistently well during the 1989 racing season , Special Agent Dale Anderson said . `` I can say he won at least one race and placed in about half of his races . The FBI did quite well with him . The bureau made enough money to offset the costs of upkeep , '' about $ 1,000 a month , Anderson told the Buffalo News . A jockey , two trainers and a trainer 's wife face possible indictment in connection with a Sept. 26 race at the track in Canandaigua , about 20 miles southeast of Rochester . That race allegedly was fixed , but FBI agents said the alleged scheme was not related to their main investigation . The FBI 's horse was not running in the suspect race , nor were agents specifically watching the four persons who were arrested , Anderson said . U.S. Attorney Dennis C. Vacco said track officials and state regulators noticed jockey Joseph Badamo was riding his horse irregularly during the race . G. Robert Langford , special agent in charge of the Buffalo office , said the investigation left the FBI with the impression that few races are fixed at Finger Lakes . The FBI bought the horse for less than $ 5,000 and ran it at the track to introduce an undercover agent to the work and social circles of those targeted in the investigation . The FBI agent played the part of a shady trainer and horse owner , Anderson said . Agents considered naming the horse after FBI Director William Sessions and having it run under the FBI 's colors , but those ideas were quickly scrapped . The horse 's name , age and sex are still being kept secret to protect the identities of those involved with the case . Now owned privately and still racing , the FBI 's horse has put its law enforcement career behind it . `` We wish him well . He served as a real good representative of the bureau , '' Anderson said .