Many Japanese housewives living in the United States have not warmed up to one of the most convenient methods for buying things in this country -- catalogue shopping . For them , the process of ordering merchandise in English , from reading product descriptions to conversing with American salespeople over the telephone is a nuisance . This frustration motivated a New York-based Japanese business to launch the first Japanese-language catalogue in the United States . Representing Dynamix Corp. , a market research company established in April , 1986 , 37-year-old entrepreneur Yasuhisa Iida and his seven colleagues introduced the 32-page , four-color catalogue last November . The catalogue is targeted at the 250,000 Japanese residents in the United States . The service accepts shopping orders by mail and telephone , in Japanese -- a great relief for Japanese families sent to work in the United States before they could perfect their English , said Iida , the firms 's executive vice president . The new catalogue lists nearly 300 products , ranging from typical American consumer products to items that can be obtained only at Japanese stores . In response to customers ' greater need for the latter type of products , made-in-Japan items represent 80 % of the catalogue 's entire listing , Iida said . Clothing Popular Sukiyaki pots , bath preparations and face rollers are among the most popular items . Clothing also ranked among the popular items among Japanese residents , Iida said , explaining that it is very difficult for them to find U.S.-made clothing that is fitted for their bodies . With an increasing Japanese business activity in the United States , more Japanese are beginning to settle in rural areas , a factor contributing to a rise in their reliance on companies such as Dynamix for securing Japanese products . Iida said most of the Japanese living in the United States , especially housewives , feel uncomfortable about many aspects of their American life , stemming from their lack of language skills . Ca n't Buy Tofu They do not know how to cope with the rush of shopping catalogues sent from many American stores to their homes every day . They do not know what kind of products are available from the catalogues , how to order them , how to lodge complaints and how to return undesired products . Each task requires a minimum skill of English language , Iida said . In an extreme case , he said , there are some Japanese who even have trouble buying a piece of tofu -- Japanese bean curd . They may have been transferred to the United States from Japan 's most rural areas where English is rarely used . The new venture uses a membership plan , requiring customers to pay an annual fee of $ 15 to receive four catalogues a year and $ 50 worth of gift coupons . Already , 13,000 have joined the plan . Orders in the first month of distribution have been well ahead of expectations , Iida said , forecasting annual sales to exceed an originally projected $ 4 million . The company has enjoyed a 15 % response rate from a mailing of the catalogue sent to 40,000 Japanese households in the United States -- much higher than an average rate of 2 % to 3 % normally seen in the mail-order business .