Congressional investigators , in a report to be released today , question Atty . Gen. Dick Thornburgh 's heavy reliance on FBI aircraft and pilots to transport him to official speaking engagements , meetings and field office visits around the country . The report by the General Accounting Office , Congress ' watchdog unit , also suggests that FBI planes would be more effectively used in investigations rather than for carrying FBI Director William S. Sessions on official travel . Rep. Bob Wise ( D-W.Va. ) , who asked for the report , and the GAO agreed with the Justice Department-FBI contention that regularly scheduled airliners can not satisfy the security requirements of the officials , both of whom have had threats made on their lives . But the GAO report , a copy of which was made available to The Times , faulted the Justice Department for not making a cost analysis of using private aircraft charters to transport the officials , and for instead concluding `` intuitively '' that government aircraft would be cheaper . `` GAO 's analysis also indicates that private aircraft services can meet the executives ' requirements better than regularly scheduled airlines , '' the report said . `` Thus , justice officials responsible for the executives ' security should determine whether ( private charters or leased aircraft ) are satisfactory . If they are , private aircraft services should be used '' under Office of Management and Budget requirements , the report said . However , Dan Eramian , a department spokesman , said that a cost analysis by the department after the GAO completed its study found that Thornburgh 's and Sessions ' use of three FBI aircraft , all of which were seized in narcotics investigations , saved taxpayers $ 500,000 a year . Eramian declined comment when asked why the department had waited until the GAO study was completed before running its cost analysis . In a letter to Thornburgh and Sessions accompanying the report , Wise noted that the three aircraft they used were intended , under FBI policy , for law enforcement missions , including narcotics control and counterterrorism efforts . Wise added that the GAO found that the aircraft are used for executive transportation 53 % of the time , 23 % for investigative flights and 24 % for pilot training and maintenance . In commenting on GAO 's findings , Eramian responded as if the agency had questioned the frequency of Thornburgh 's travel and not his reliance on FBI aircraft and pilots who are also trained as investigators . `` The Department of Justice is a field agency , not centered in the District of Columbia , '' he said . `` There are 93 U.S. attorneys ' offices all across the country . The attorney general feels it 's good policy for the general to visit the troops and see what 's going on . '' During the period studied by the GAO -- August , 1988 , through July , 1989 -- Thornburgh took 39 trips using government aircraft , usually accompanied by at least one staff member and an FBI security detail .