A preppy-looking tycoon from Ft. Worth named Robert Muse Bass came to the fairgrounds in this San Joaquin Valley town of 190,000 this weekend and received a welcome normally accorded royalty or rock stars . Bass , a bashful sort who rarely ventures into the public spotlight , was all smiles as he was mobbed by adoring employes of American Savings who clamored to get his autograph and take his picture . `` Thank you for helping us survive , '' one employee after another told him . The outpouring of affection came after the 40-year-old Bass finally sealed a deal on Dec. 28 to buy American Savings , which has been a financial mess since 1984 because of huge losses and repeated deposit runs . Employees had been haunted for years with the possibility that American Savings might be closed or carved up . Bass , a billionaire and corporate acquisition specialist , raised $ 350 million in new capital for American Savings and pledged to raise an additional $ 150 million in the new three years . In return , party goers gave him a toaster , the traditional gift from a thrift when a depositor opens a new account , and a T-shirt saying : `` American Independence Day : 12/28/88 . '' To celebrate the new era , Bass threw parties at locations around the state in places like Stockton , Oakland , Anaheim and Woodland Hills . The parties were linked together with live satellite broadcasts . `` I have been waiting for this party for four years , '' said Layna Browdy , American Savings ' chief public relations official during most of the turmoil . Browdy arranged the party , but declined to say what it cost . The celebration was especially festive here , where the dignitaries gathered . American Savings is headquartered in Stockton , located about 60 miles east of Oakland , and employs nearly a third of its 5,300 workers here . American Savings is also Stockton 's largest private employer . 'All Positive ' The party had the ambiance of a 1950s pep rally and sock hop , all designed to dovetail with American Savings ' new advertising theme that it now operates by old-fashioned standards of service and strength . In case anyone did not get the nostalgia message , Frankie Avalon -- actor , singer and 1950s teen-age heart throb -- acted as party host and general cheerleader . The party included repeated standing ovations for Bass , warm tributes to William J. Popejoy , who ran the company during the tough times , and a pep talk by the new boss , Mario J. Antoci . `` I hate negative thinking , '' Antoci , who replaced Popejoy as chief executive late last month , said . `` From this point on , it 's all positive . '' The only discordant note came from Roger Martin , the federal banking regulator who spearheaded a grueling , monthslong regulatory effort to find a buyer for American Savings . Martin took the occasion to take a jab at William Crawford , the California savings and loan commissioner who refused to help with the federal effort to sell American Savings to Bass . `` I hope you notice that we did n't invite commissioner Crawford , '' Martin said . The party amounted to a last hurrah for Popejoy , who is going into business with Bass and will remain a director at American Savings . Wearing saddle shoes , blue jeans and a high school-style letter sweater , Popejoy was also surrounded by well-wishers who wanted his autograph and photograph . Although many outsiders -- financial analysts , competitors , regulators -- did not hold Popejoy in especially high regard , inside the company he was a popular and good-humored figure who seldom let discouragement show . When introduced to the crowd , the 50-year-old Popejoy got an ovation that equaled the one accorded Bass . `` Thank you , '' he cracked . `` That was well deserved . ''