With two seconds left , their team down two points and the length of the court to go Tuesday night , El Camino 's Travis Gilley and Dee Boyer figured this was no time for one of their coach 's crazy plays . But Gilley , Boyer and the rest of 2,000 people jammed inside El Camino 's gym soon became believers in Coach Ray Johnson . El Camino 's Shaun Scurry heaved the ball to heavily guarded Boyer at the top of the key , and Boyer tipped it to Gilley for an 18-foot jumper that barely hit the back of the rim and fell in to make it 73-73 . From there , there was no stopping El Camino . The Wildcats blew away from Compton in the three-minute overtime , scoring 19 points to win the quarterfinal round of the Division II Southern California Regionals , 92-78 . `` We figured our miracle happened , now let 's go and win the game , '' Gilley said . In addition to making the game-tying shot , Gilley scored seven of El Camino 's 19 points in overtime to finish with a team-high 29 . El Camino ( 23-6 ) , seeded fourth , will now play at No . 1 Artesia Thursday night . The play that enabled El Camino to live another day was an old favorite of Johnson 's . `` I used that play when I was at Oceanside , '' he said . `` We won a game with it there too . It 's a sucker play , everybody rushes to the ball . It 's a natural reaction . '' Boyer , who finished with eight points , 14 rebounds and six blocks , said , `` It did n't seem like two seconds was enough , but then I realized the clock does n't start until the ball hits my hands . '' El Camino led at the end of the first quarter , 19-15 , but trailed at halftime , 37-31 , and throughout most of the game . In fact , the Wildcats were down , 65-58 , with 5:30 left in regulation before they scored six consecutive points to close to 65-64 with 3:22 left . Compton ( 22-8 ) took a 71-67 lead with 1:50 left , but Scurry hit a 15-foot jumper and Gilley sank two free throws to tie it a 71 with 1:05 remaining . Boyer had an opportunity to put El Camino ahead with 12 seconds left , but he missed two free throws . Compton 's Derick Florence then came down and hit a 16-foot jumper to give his team a 73-71 lead with two seconds left . `` We wanted the last shot , '' Compton Coach Curtis Knight said . `` We did n't want to shoot so early . '' DAVE McKIBBEN