It is hard to dismiss Tony Palmer 's `` Testimony , '' a high-concept film based on the memoirs of composer Dmitri Shostakovich , which airs tonight on PBS . But if you do n't zap it midway in a fit of pique ( and many Shosty admirers will do so , pronto , screaming `` intellectual tripe ! `` ) , you must shed any hope of a glimpse into the inner workings of the Soviet composer who died in 1975 as perhaps the 20th Century 's greatest symphonist and one of its most troubling enigmas . Palmer 's `` Testimony '' is tenuously based on Shostakovich 's memoirs , purportedly `` narrated to Solomon Volkov '' and published in 1980 . Volkov 's publication of the composer 's rambling recollections caused a storm , partly over the authenticity of the statements and partly because Volkov was seen as an apologist for a composer who more than once cooperated with Soviet officials during Stalin 's reign of terror . Palmer , who co-wrote , produced and directed `` Testimony , '' is true to the memoirs only in its fervid development of the theme of Shostakovich 's tangled relationship with the Soviet political machinery and its ruthless chief manipulator , Josef Stalin . Stalin 's shadow crossed everything in Soviet life , including the arts . As the memoirs show , Shostakovich carried the scars long after Stalin 's death in 1953 . Shostakovich was a victim , a portrait of an artist who was not a hero . He was too frail to fight , never a Solzhenitsyn , and not strong enough to abandon his country , like an Igor Stravinsky , who later denounced him . Shostakovich closed his eyes and stayed in the Soviet Union while Stalin 's monstrosities swirled around him , producing an output that included 15 symphonies and an equal number of string quartets , two operas and six concertos . His music has a permanent place , yet Shostakovich 's complicity has left his persona , at least in the world music community , in a kind of limbo . One hungers to know the man , what made him do the duplicitous things he did , but Palmer would argue that there is little sense in knowing the man outside his political context . And so for 2 1/2 hours , `` Testimony '' plays out Shostakovich 's struggle with Stalin on an abstract psychological landscape , like one long Eisenstein propaganda film with a sound track by Shostakovich . Shot in grainy black and white , Palmer 's `` Testimony '' has the dank atmosphere of Orwell 's `` 1984 '' and the dense , bureaucratic texture of Terry Gilliam 's `` Brazil . '' It is intercut with documentary film footage and filled with garish angles , shadows , hand-held camera effects and a busy sound track . As he loosely visits a chronology of Shostakovich 's life , Palmer dashes notions of time and reality and feels no need to be entirely comprehensible to the viewer . Palmer 's intent is a kind of ecstatic collage , a visual bombardment of fast-edited images . `` Testimony , '' which begins at Shostakovich 's funeral , seems very much like the hallucinations of a dying man , a life passing before one 's eyes . Ben Kingsley , of `` Gandhi '' and `` Betrayal '' fame , plays Shostakovich with a kind of earnest intensity that unfortunately can not seem to make it out from under Palmer 's visual pyrotechnics .