Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard often said that man 's most basic drive is that of survival . And when it came to his own , he used whatever was necessary -- false identities , cover stories , deception . There is no better illustration of this than the way he secretly controlled the Church of Scientology while hiding from a world he viewed as increasingly hostile . Hubbard was last seen publicly in February 1980 , in the desert community of Hemet , a few miles from a high-security compound that houses the church 's movie and recording studio . His sudden departure fueled wild and intense speculation . The church said Hubbard went into seclusion to continue his Scientology research and to resurrect his science fiction-writing career . But former aides have said he dropped from sight to avoid subpoenas and government tax agents probing allegations that he was skimming church funds . Publications throughout the world ran stories about Hubbard 's disappearance . `` Mystery of the Vanished Ruler '' was the headline in Time magazine . In 1982 , Hubbard 's estranged son filed a probate petition trying to wrest control of the Scientology empire . He argued that his father was either dead or mentally incompetent and that his riches were being plundered by Scientology executives . The suit was dismissed after Hubbard , through an attorney , submitted an affidavit with his fingerprints , saying that he was well and wanted to be left alone . No doubt , Hubbard would have chuckled with satisfaction over the speculation surrounding his whereabouts . For he had always considered himself a shrewd strategist and a master of the intelligence game , endlessly calculating ways to outwit his foes . Hubbard took with him only two people , a married couple named Pat and Anne Broeker . Pat Broeker , Hubbard 's personal messenger at the time , had gone into hiding with him once before and knew how to ensure his security . Broeker relished cloak-and-dagger operations . His nickname among Hubbard 's other messengers was `` 007 . '' Anne had been one of Hubbard 's top aides for years . She was cool under pressure and able to defuse Hubbard 's volatile temper . Hubbard and the Broekers spent their first several years together on the move . For months , they traveled the Pacific Northwest in a motor home . They lived in apartments in Newport Beach and the suburbs of Los Angeles . Then , in the summer of 1983 , they decided to settle down in a dusty ranch town called Creston , population 270 , where the hot , arid climate would be kind to Hubbard 's bursitis . About 30 miles inland from San Luis Obispo , it was a perfect spot for a man of notoriety to live in obscurity . In those parts , people do n't ask a lot of questions about someone else 's business . Hubbard and the Broekers concocted an elaborate set of phony names and backgrounds to conceal their identities from the townsfolk . Pat and Anne Broeker went by the names Mike and Lisa Mitchell . Hubbard became Lisa 's father , Jack , who impressed the locals as a chatty old man , charismatic but sometimes gruff . They purchased a 160-acre ranch known as the Whispering Winds for $ 700,000 , using 30 cashier 's checks drawn on various California banks . Pat Broeker told the sellers , Ed and Sherry Shahan , that he had recently inherited millions of dollars and was looking to leave his home in Upstate New York to raise livestock in California . At the time , the Shahans were suspicious . As Ed Shahan recalled , `` They were having trouble deciding whose name to put the property in . '' In less than three years , Hubbard poured an estimated $ 3 million into the local economy as he redesigned the ranch to his exacting and elaborate specifications . He launched one project after another , some of them seemingly senseless , according to local residents . He ordered the construction of a quarter-mile horse-racing track with an observation tower . The track reportedly was never used . The 10-room ranch house was gutted and remodeled so many times that it went virtually uninhabited during Hubbard 's time there . He lived and worked in a luxurious 40-foot Bluebird motor home parked near the stables . All this was done without work permits , which meant that Hubbard and his aides would not have to worry about nosy county inspectors . Like Hubbard 's aides in earlier years , the hired help saw extreme sides of the man who was chauffeured around the property in a black Subaru pickup by Anne Broeker . Fencing contractor Jim Froelicher of Paso Robles remembers asking him for advice on buying a camera . Several days later , Froelicher said , Hubbard presented him with a 35mm camera as a gift . Longtime Creston resident Ed Lindquist , on the other hand , said painters dropped by the local tavern at lunch to talk about how the `` old man '' was acting eccentric . They said he had them paint the walls again and again because they `` were n't white enough , '' according to Lindquist . Scientology officials insist that Hubbard was in fine mental and physical health during his years in seclusion . Most of his days , they say , were spent reading , writing and enjoying the ranch 's beauty and livestock , which included llamas and buffalo . But Hubbard was doing much more , according to former aides . Even in hiding , they say , he kept a close watch and a tight grip on the church he built -- as he had for decades . As early as 1966 , Hubbard claimed to have relinquished managerial control of the church . But ex-Scientologists and several court rulings have held that this was a maneuver to shield Hubbard from potential legal actions and accountability for the group 's activities . Over the years , efforts to conceal Hubbard 's ties to the church were extensive and extreme . In 1980 , for example , a massive shredding operation was undertaken at the church 's desert compound outside Palm Springs after Scientology officials received an erroneous tip of an imminent FBI raid , according to a former aide . `` Anything that indicated that L. Ron Hubbard controlled the church or was engaged in management was to be shredded , '' recalled Hubbard 's former public relations officer , Laurel Sullivan . For more than two days , Sullivan said , roughly 200 Scientologists crammed thousands of documents into a huge shredder nicknamed `` Jaws . '' Documents too valuable to destroy , she added , were buried in the ground or under floorboards . In his self-imposed exile , Hubbard continued to reign over Scientology with almost paranoid secrecy . He relayed his orders in writing or on tape cassettes to Pat Broeker , who then passed them to a ranking Scientologist named David Miscavige , the man responsible for seeing that church executives complied . Hubbard 's communiques travelled a circuitous route in the darkness of night , changing hands from Broeker to Miscavige at designated sites throughout Southern California . To mask the author 's identity , the missives were signed with codes that carried the weight of Hubbard 's signature . Sometimes Broeker himself appeared from parts unknown to personally deliver Hubbard 's instructions to church executives . From his secret seat of power in the oak-studded hills above San Luis Obispo , Hubbard also made sure that he would not be severed from the riches of his Scientology empire , high-level church defectors would later tell government investigators . They alleged that Hubbard skimmed millions of dollars from church coffers while he was in hiding -- carrying on a tradition that the Internal Revenue Service said he began practically at Scientology 's inception about 30 years ago . Hubbard and his aides had always denied the allegations , and accused the IRS of waging a campaign against the church and its founder . While Hubbard was underground , the IRS launched a criminal probe of his finances . But the investigation would soon be without a target , and ultimately abandoned . By late 1985 , Hubbard 's directives to underlings had tapered off . At age 74 , he no longer resembled the robust and natty man whose dated photographs fill Scientology 's promotional literature . Living in isolation , separated from his devoted followers , he had let himself go . His thin gray hair , with streaks of the old red , hung without sheen to his shoulders . He had grown a stringy , unkempt beard and mustache . His round face was now sunken and his ruddy complexion had turned pasty . He was an old man and he was nearing death . On or about Jan. 17 , 1986 , Hubbard suffered a `` cerebral vascular accident , '' commonly known as a stroke . Caring for him was Gene Denk , a Scientologist doctor and Hubbard 's physician for eight years . There was little Denk could do for Hubbard in those final days -- the stroke was debilitating . He was bedridden and his speech was badly impaired . One week later , at 8 p.m. on Friday , Jan. 24 , Hubbard died . Throughout the night , according to neighbor Robert Whaley , heavy traffic inexplicably moved in and out of the ranch . Whaley , a retired advertising executive , said that he was kept awake by headlights shining through his windows . For more than 11 hours , Hubbard 's body remained in the motor home where he died . Scientology attorney Earle Cooley had ordered that Hubbard not be touched until he arrived by car from Los Angeles with another Scientology lawyer . The next morning , Cooley telephoned Reis Chapel , a San Luis Obispo mortuary , and arranged to have the body cremated . With Cooley present , Hubbard was transported to the mortuary . Once chapel officials learned who Hubbard was , however , they became concerned about the church 's rush to cremate him . They contacted the San Luis Obispo County coroner , who halted the cremation until the body could be examined and blood tests performed . When then-Deputy Coroner Don Hines arrived , Cooley presented him with a certificate that Hubbard had signed just four days before his death . It stated that , for religious reasons , he wanted no autopsy . Cooley also produced a will that Hubbard had signed the day before he died , directing that his body be promptly cremated and that his vast wealth be distributed according to the provisions of a confidential trust he had established . His once-ornate trademark signature was little more than a scrawl . After the blood tests and examination revealed no foul play , coroner Hines approved the cremation . With Cooley 's consent , he also photographed the body and lifted fingerprints as a way to later confirm that it was the reclusive Hubbard and not a hoax . Within hours , Hubbard 's ashes were scattered at sea by the Broekers and Miscavige . Two days after Hubbard 's death , Pat Broeker stood before a standing-room-only crowd of Scientologists at the Hollywood Palladium . It was his first public appearance in six years , and he had just broken the news of Hubbard 's passing . The cheers were deafening . Broeker announced that Hubbard had made a conscious decision to `` sever all ties '' to this world so he could continue his Scientology research in spirit form -- testimony to the power of the man and his teachings . He `` laid down in his bed and he left , '' Broeker said . `` And that was it . '' Hubbard left behind an organization that would continue to function as though he were still alive . His millions of words -- the lifeblood of Scientology -- have now been computerized for wisdom and instructions at the touch of a button . In Scientology , he was -- and always will be -- the `` Source . ''