Just in case you do n't recognize Dennis Woodruff when he drives down the street , he has thoughtfully covered his car with dozens of publicity stills of himself , as well as his phone number and agent 's name . Woodruff , 29 , is an aspiring actor . `` I 'm trying to create an aura , like James Dean , '' he explains . Most mornings , he and his aura drive from his apartment into Hollywood , where he leaves his car in a lot next to Mann 's Chinese Theater . Then he takes a bus home and sits by the phone , waiting for his big break . At day 's end , his girlfriend takes him back to Hollywood , where he picks up his car ( after paying $ 4 ) and drives it home . `` I want the public to know me -- that 's the essence of entertainment , '' he points out . He admits that his car has n't brought him any casting calls , but says he 's surviving by finding occasional bit roles ( `` Robo Cop 2 '' and TV 's `` Quantum Leap '' ) . In the meantime , camera-toting tourists snap away in the parking lot next to Mann 's all day . Woodruff 's car , at least , has become a star . In L.A. , you never know who 's going to make it into show biz . For instance , El Teatro de la Realidad ( Theatre of Reality ) , will offer free performances June 29-30 of `` Where the Gods Walk , '' a play about the street vendors who live and work in L.A. Not only will some vendors perform in the showings at the L.A . Photography Center and Barnsdall Park 's Gallery Theater , but they will also sell their ice creams and hot dogs to spectators . Election analysts who broke the results down by issue and voter category may have neglected one angle in the state attorney general 's race . During the primary campaign , a spokesman for Democratic hopeful Ira Reiner scornfully referred to rival Arlo Smith , who sports about as much hair as your Only in L.A. correspondent , as `` Potato Head . '' Reiner , the silver-thatched L.A. County district attorney , was then upset by Smith , his San Francisco counterpart . And now Reiner , no doubt , is haunted by the possibility that he lost as the result of the baldy backlash . Speaking of vicious stereotypes , the L.A . Downtown News was criticized this week by a letter writer who was upset because the newspaper reported that one local activist `` looks like a librarian . . . a bit rumpled , a bit aloof . '' The writer wrote : `` Remember what happened to Andy Rooney ? Librarians do n't have ' a look , ' and they take special pains not to be 'rumpled ' or 'aloof . ' `` No Rooney-type suspension seems forthcoming . The News said , `` We did not receive any other letters complaining about our abuse of librarians . '' But back to Potato Head : A KFWB news announcer reported that Democratic gubernatorial candidate Dianne Feinstein will be running `` against Pete Smith . '' That 's news to Arlo Wilson . LAny : When Dollar Rent-a-Car opened in 1966 , you could rent a Volkswagen bug for $ 1 a day . Dollar 's current daily rate for an economy model is $ 29.95 .