On the other side of the pipeline , less than 200 yards from this storied 416-mile gravel road leading into Alaska 's far north , a huge grizzly sow browsing for berries glowed golden in the slanting rays of the Arctic summer 's never-ending sun . Nearby , her two cubs tumbled in a bruising game . About 100 yards upwind , a big cow moose and her spindle-legged calf grazed , knowing they were protected from the deadly grizzly by wind direction and the bear 's terrible eyesight . Alaska natives can spend a lifetime without seeing a single elusive grizzly , much less a family of three at one time , but we were lucky . Reluctantly , we left the grizzlies and climbed back aboard the bus to continue our journey over the Brooks Range , jutting impressively ahead , and on to frigid Coldfoot for the night . The next day we would plunge into the vast Yukon River Basin , then roll into Fairbanks in late afternoon . Departure from Prudhoe Bay 's remote oil camp was early in the morning on the only road connecting Prudhoe with Fairbanks nearly 500 miles to the south . We had been paralleling part of the 800-mile Trans Alaska Pipeline System -- at $ 8 billion , the most costly , privately financed construction project ever . We had arrived by air from Fairbanks a day earlier and had been driven around the oil fields and pipeline terminus . We saw distant bands of caribou ( it was too early for the vast herds that arrived later ) , stayed overnight in the Arctic Caribou Inn , which had been left over from the boom days of construction and exploration , and dined in a cafeteria with bemused oil workers . Road travel is closed to private vehicles above the Arctic Circle , and casual visitors are prohibited from leaving Prudhoe 's airport at Deadhorse . Virtually everything is owned by the oil companies and closed to outsiders ; there are no taxis , no restaurants and no hotels that are n't private . The bus tours offered by Princess Tours and Westours ' Gray Line of Alaska are the only way to reach , explore and overnight at the forlorn place at the end of an arid tundra wasteland that daily produces two million gallons , or one-fifth of the country 's domestic oil . The fascinating and somewhat primitive tours began just three summers ago when a handful of experimental tours , using the Dalton Highway and empty facilities owned by the Prudhoe area 's Native Alaska Trust , were approved by the state and the oil companies controlling access to Prudhoe . The tours launched by Princess were soon expanded into a robust program that this summer is providing 73 northbound and southbound departures by Princess and Gray Line . One key to establishing the tour programs was to get permission to travel the narrow , fragile ribbon of the Dalton Highway that is open only to permit-holding vehicles . Another was convincing Dick and Cathy Mackey to add an inn to their restaurant and truck stop in Coldfoot , which is about halfway between Prudhoe and Fairbanks . Construction on the Dalton Highway began in 1974 . Built as a supply conduit for the pipeline , it is closed to most traffic past aptly-named Disaster Creek because of the dangers inherent in driving in the empty Arctic . The Mackeys , proprietors of the world 's northernmost truck stop ( as well as America 's northernmost saloon ) , were persuaded that enough travelers would pay for tours above the Arctic Circle . The state eventually gave its approval to a limited number of bus trips , reasoning that experienced drivers and radio contact minimized the chance of a mishap along a road so remote that there is not a single structure -- except for isolated pipeline facilities -- all the way from Coldfoot to Prudhoe . Then the Mackeys built their Arctic Acres Inn , which has been expanded to 52 rooms . Our tour began in Fairbanks , where we boarded a jet and flew to Prudhoe Bay . But it did n't look like the last day of May as we circled to land 1,300 miles from the North Pole . The pilot had warned us , issuing what sounded like a gleeful chuckle , that snow was blowing and it was 27 degrees at Prudhoe . A Treeless Plain As we banked low over the still-frozen Beaufort Sea for the approach to the ominously named Deadhorse , the ice merged with the tundra to produce a seamless vista of flat , featureless gloom . Not one oil well or a single caribou was visible on the great treeless plain of Alaska 's North Slope , which is famous for both . The plane bumped onto a runway that no one ever saw and rolled to a stop in front of low buildings that were the same shade of dull gray as the overcast that blanketed everything . When we stepped outside , snow stung our eyes and the cold made our teeth rattle . Deadhorse and Prudhoe have no permanent residents for a very good reason . The isolation is mentally stressful , particularly in the dark Arctic winter , where , for 56 days , the sun fails to rise at all . Workers generally are limited to nine weeks of 10 to 12 hours on the job daily before being flown south . It 's no wonder that both firearms and alcohol are banned . We shuffled across the Tarmac , through the terminal and into a waiting motor coach , in which the driver grinned at our amazement . `` Take your time , '' he drawled in reference to summer 's 75 days above the Arctic Circle when the sun does n't set . `` It wo n't get dark until August . '' Little-Seen Wildlife Along with the fascination of Prudhoe 's desolation and its technological marvels , it was also a rare opportunity to view some of the most spectacular and seldom-seen wilderness and wildlife in the world . The imposing Brooks Range that slashes across Alaska above the Arctic Circle is a remote and untouched mountain chain . The great tundra plain of the North Slope , with its clouds of caribou and other wildlife , is considered the Serengeti Plain of North America . On that flat and lonely Arctic plain , far past the northern tree line , the permafrost extends down into the earth about half a mile . Yet in the few short weeks of summer , with the coming of the caribou and the return of migrating waterfowl and other birds , the suddenly awakened tundra puddles and teems with life . Carpets of flowers explode from nowhere . But beware of mosquitoes and do n't forget to take along insect repellent . -- -- -- The Prudhoe Bay pipeline tours are scheduled through Sept. 8 . Princess Tours has four-day excursions costing $ 899 per person . The price includes overnights in Fairbanks , Prudhoe and Coldfoot , bus travel in one direction and air in the other and a box lunch served midway between Prudhoe and Coldfoot . Other meals are additional , including a breakfast buffet at Prudhoe and a $ 14.50 dinner buffet at Coldfoot 's Arctic Acres Inn . For information and a brochure ( ask for Alaska Land Tours ) , contact Princess Tours , 2815 2nd Ave. , Seattle 98121-1299 , toll-free ( 800 ) 647-7750 . Gray Line of Alaska 's three-day trips cost $ 585 and include the same features as Princess , except for the Fairbanks overnight . For information and a brochure ( ask for Your Alaska Connection ) , contact Gray Line of Alaska , 300 Elliott Ave. West , Seattle 98119 , or call toll-free ( 800 ) 544-2206 . Air fare to Fairbanks is extra for both company tours . The tours are also sold as add-ons to this season 's Alaska cruises of Princess Cruises and Holland America Line .