In a billion years , when drifting continents have reshaped Earth 's face and humans are extinct or changed by evolution , Voyager 2 will still be cruising the stars . `` It 's mind-boggling . We 're actually going out to the stars , '' said Bruce Brymer , Voyager 's lead mission controller at NASA 's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena . `` This spacecraft is going to outlive us . It 's going to be out there forever . '' In August , Voyager 2 swept past Neptune and its icy volcanic moon Triton -- the last planetary exploration in an incredible 12-year journey that also took the spacecraft past Jupiter , Saturn , Uranus and more than 50 moons . Interstellar Mission Now , Voyager 2 is speeding into the loneliest part of its trek : the Voyager Interstellar Mission . With Voyager 1 , it will study the sun 's magnetic field , solar wind and ultraviolet light from distant stars and galaxies . Like Pioneers 10 and 11 and Voyager 1 , which explored Jupiter and Saturn , Voyager 2 also will search for the edge of the solar system . The Voyagers are expected to return information to Earth until about 2015 or 2020 . Contact eventually will be cut off by some malfunction , by exhaustion of the probes ' plutonium power generators , or when their thruster fuel runs out , leaving them unable to point antennas at Earth . Then , the robot explorers will pass among the stars , each carrying a 12-inch copper record of sounds and sights from Earth in case they are found by a spacefaring civilization . `` Hopefully they will understand our peaceful and humble attempt at knowing and exploring the great unknown , '' Brymer said . For now , Voyager 2 's work is more mundane . `` The interstellar mission is sort of anticlimactic . There 's no real drama expected . We 're suffering from the blues a little bit , '' he said . `` It 's almost like postpartum depression . We 've gone through such highs with the spacecraft . There 's a great sense of melancholy now . It 's like none I 've sensed before . '' Voyager 2 's encounter with Neptune officially ends Oct. 2 , when it will be 34.7 million miles past the planet , going 37,337 m.p.h . It will be 2.83 billion miles from Earth , and will have traveled 4.46 billion miles since 1977 . Until December , Voyager 2 occasionally will glance at Neptune and dark space to improve the accuracy of observations its cameras and instruments made during the Neptune flyby , said Voyager project manager Norm Haynes . Pictures of empty space let engineers measure how much sunlight reflects off Voyager into its cameras . A computer can subtract the light from Voyager 's Neptune and Triton photographs , producing clearer prints , Haynes said . In April , most of the planets will be positioned for one of the Voyagers to take photographs for assembly into a single picture of the solar system . `` The planets are small and there 's lots of dark space out there , '' he said . `` Maybe it will give people a better impression of the vastness of things . '' Then engineers will turn off Voyager 2 's TV cameras and its infrared and visible light sensors . Sensors Already at Work Voyager 's Interstellar Mission officially starts Jan. 1 , but the spacecraft already is using its remaining sensors to make the kind of measurements it will continue to collect for years . Ultraviolet light and cosmic ray sensors study distant galaxies and stars , and also black holes and pulsars -- remnants of stars that died in fiery supernova explosions . Both Voyagers also will keep measuring magnetic fields , electrically charged particles that make up solar wind , and waves in that wind . If the Voyagers and Pioneers survive , one or more of them may detect the `` heliopause , '' where solar wind yields to interstellar wind 5 billion to 14 billion miles from the sun . Many scientists consider it the edge of the solar system . By about 2020 , the Voyagers will lose contact with Earth . `` My electrical energy is fading , and I am feeling old and useless , '' says Voyager 2 's imaginary voice in `` The Voyager Neptune Travel Guide , '' a National Aeronautics and Space Administration publication . `` The planet which gave me life said goodby . I will no longer hear its voice , nor it my heartbeat . '' Then , Voyager will approach the stars , passing them like distant beacons in an incredible void . In the year 20391 , Voyager will pass within 3.21 light years , 18.9 trillion miles , of Proxima Centauri , the nearest star . About 24,000 years from now , it should pass through the Oort Cloud , a vast spherical cloud of comets that other scientists consider the true edge of the solar system . `` Then Voyager makes for the open sea of interstellar space , free of the sun 's gravity and wandering forever in the Milky Way galaxy , going around the center of the galaxy once every quarter-billion years , '' said Cornell University astronomer Carl Sagan . NASA estimates that in the year 40176 , Voyager 2 will fly 1.65 light years from Ross 248 -- the first time it will be closer to another star than to the sun , which will be 1.99 light years from Voyager . Near Sirius in Year 296036 In the year 296036 , Voyager 2 will make its closest approach to Sirius , the brightest star visible from Earth . Deep space is benign , so dust and cosmic rays will erode Voyager 2 extraordinarily slowly . In a billion or more years , Sagan said , `` there will be no more humans because we 'll be extinct or we 'll be somebody else . There will be no human artifacts left on Earth . Continental drift will completely change what the continents look like . `` But this brave spacecraft will be there , a surviving artifact of our species and our times . '' Perhaps one day , aliens in a starship may find one of the Voyagers , then play the copper record . They will hear greetings in 60 languages from Chinese to Welsh to Urdu , including a 7-year-old boy offering salutations from Earth 's children . There also is the music of many cultures , from Chuck Berry 's rock ' n ' roll to Mozart , Bach and Beethoven . The aliens will listen to the sounds of surf , wind , rain and thunder ; croaking frogs and laughing hyenas ; a train , a truck , a jet and a rocket ; a baby crying and lovers kissing . Photographs , Diagrams The record also holds 115 electronically encoded photographs or diagrams showing humans , the Earth and other planets , human chromosomes , a fetus , the Golden Gate , the Grand Tetons and the Great Wall of China . And the extraterrestrials will read a message written July 16 , 1977 , by Jimmy Carter , then President of a nation on a little planet that , two months later , dared to send a bit of itself to the stars : '' This is a present from a small distant world , a token of our sounds , our science , our images , our music , our thoughts and our feelings . `` We are attempting to survive our time so we may live into yours . We hope someday , having solved the problems we face , to join a community of galactic civilizations . This record represents our hope and our determination , and our good will in a vast and awesome universe . ''