Unleash the creativity of 16 top Los Angeles interior designers , combine it with the talents of an equal number of outstanding area chefs and restaurateurs , mix in the equivalent amount of celebrities , and you have the recipe for the American Institute of Wine and Food fund-raiser , `` Celebrations . '' This showing of holiday dining table-top designs and menus will be open to the public today and Sunday from 1 to 5 p.m. in the 5th-floor Grand Court/Galleria of the Pacific Design Center . From Intimate to Elaborate Displays range from the intimate `` A Cultural Affair , '' designed by Barbara Barry for Merry Norris , president of the Los Angeles Cultural Affairs Commission , to Waldo Fernandez 's `` Home Casino Party , '' created for client Merv Griffin and featuring a game table flown in from Resorts International in Atlantic City . Barry designed a low custom table and chaises for serving the dinner menu of champagne and truffle soup , circle of lobster in salt crust , square of veal in filo pastry with Port wine sauce and Mondrian of fresh fruit puree developed by Joachim Splichal of Patina . `` I wanted to express her ( Norris ' ) personal identity , '' Barry said , so accessories to the oxblood-gold-and-yellow-hued setting include Norris ' personal art books , paintings and sculptures . To accompany Griffin 's home-casino party setting , Michael Roberts of Trumps designed a menu of cheese and artichoke croquette , clam chowder , roasted game hens with candied lemon and flourless chocolate cake . Turkish designer Kalef Alaton has used the theme `` The Feast of Ramadan '' in a design for Terry ( Mrs. Dennis ) Stanfill . Ron Gucciardo , Alaton 's assistant , described the setting as `` very opulent , with lots of Puiforcat silver and large-scale suede-upholstered dining chairs with gilt legs . '' Chefs/restaurateurs Mary Sue Milliken and Susan Feniger of City Restaurant and Border Grill developed the menu for this celebration . Opulent also describes the `` Russian Easter '' theme designer Craig Wright chose for actor Michael Douglas and his wife , Diandra . `` Mrs. Douglas is very fond of Russian furniture , '' Wright said , `` and has a collection in their New York apartment . '' Bristol Glass Eggs The table centerpiece is made of French 19th-Century Bristol glass eggs , mounted in gold-washed bronze . The multicolored Flora Danica china is banded by gold and accompanied by Odiot of Paris gold-washed silver . The menu for the dinner was created by sister and brother Pam and Peter Morton of Morton 's . It includes borscht , lamb with pickle sauce , spicy red cabbage , potato pancakes , sweet-and-sour cucumber salad and apple strudel . Quite a different approach was taken by designer Frank Pennino in his `` Thanksgiving in the Mountains '' theme for John and Rose Candy . The setting is the porch of a home in the Adirondacks , complete with pine trees . Twig furniture accompanies a quilt-covered table set with pewter , sponge ware and a woodsy centerpiece . The dinner menu , designed by Rolf Nonnast of Saddle Peak Lodge , includes parsnip mousse , quail with wild mushrooms and brioche stuffing , assorted baby squash , four-leaf salad and chestnut souffle . Other themes , their designers and the menu creators include : -- Midsummer 's Night Dream , designer Val Arnold and chef Jean Francois Meteigner of L'Orangerie for William and Jean French Smith . -- New Year 's Eve , designer Tom Buckley and chef Michel Blanchet of L'Ermitage for Lady Chaplin ( Oona O'Neill ) . -- St. Valentine 's Day , designer Susan Cohen and restaurateur Piero Selvaggio of Valentino 's for Deborah Shelton . -- A Spring Luncheon , designer Phyllis Rowen Sugarman and restaurateur Michael McCarty of Michael 's for Bob Newhart . -- A Celebration With Dudley Moore , Intradesign designer Richard Mayhew and chef Leonard Schwartz of 72 Market Street for Dudley Moore . -- St. Patrick 's Day , designer Jack Lowrance and chef Roland Speisser of Jimmy 's for Mary Ann Mobley Collins . -- Picnic in Napa , designer Hank Morgan and chef Raphael Magana of Mark 's for Earl Hamner . -- Evening at the Opera , designer Jim Northcutt and chef/restaurateur Michel Richard of Citrus for Douglas S. Cramer . -- Summer Picnic , designer Nancy Goslee Power and chef/restaurateur Ken Frank of La Toque for Hugh Johnson . -- Cast Party for Oprah Winfrey , designer Janet Polizzi and chef Elka Gilmore for Jerry and Carole Isenberg . -- Halloween , designer John Patton and chef/restaurateur John Sedlar of St. Estephe for Loretta Swit . Tickets for the showing may be purchased for $ 10 at the door of the Pacific Design Center , located at San Vicente Boulevard and Melrose Avenue in West Hollywood . Proceeds will be used to fund the American Institute of Wine and Food , a nonprofit organization dedicated to the improvement of American gastronomy by bringing wine and food professionals and nonprofessionals together through diverse educational and social programs .