An emotional District of Columbia Mayor Marion Barry , facing crack cocaine charges and a shattered political future , announced Sunday that he intends to `` find a way to begin to heal my body , mind and soul . '' Barry , 53 , who originally was scheduled to launch his campaign for a fourth term Sunday , described the days since his arrest by FBI agents Thursday night as `` the most difficult of my life , more difficult than fighting my way out of poverty as a black youth born in the segregated Deep South , more difficult than the fear and the hatred I faced as a civil rights leader in the 1960s , more difficult than I could have imagined , because this time I have come to face my deepest human failures . '' Barry , appearing close to tears , made his statement surrounded by members of the clergy in front of St. Timothy 's Episcopal Church , located near his Washington home . At his side was his wife , who at times grasped his hand . Barry , who in the past has repeatedly denied using drugs , took no questions and did not specifically mention drug abuse in his comments . He did not directly state that he will seek treatment and did not address the question of whether he will remain in office . `` I realize I 'm going to have to walk this journey by myself , '' he said . `` It 's going to take Marion Barry walking this journey . But I say to others who are pained and hurt as I am : 'Join me brothers and sisters . We can make it . We will make it . It 's going to be a lonely journey , but I stand and God stands with me . ' `` Barry said he had spent the morning praying and talking with members of the clergy . `` They helped me feel good about the fact that , in the final analysis , it is not the title that a person holds that is important , '' he said . `` It is not Marion Barry the mayor that counts . It is Marion Barry the person . . . . `` These ministers have helped me to keep the strength that I need to announce today that I 'm going to find a way to begin to heal my body , mind and soul . '' When he finished , Effi , his wife of 12 years , said she was grateful to God for giving Barry `` the strength to admit to the whole world that , as a mortal human being , he has reached the hour of reckoning where he realizes that it is truly in God 's hands . '' Turning to her husband , she said : `` Marion , for you to admit to the world that you have a problem , ( that ) you need to deal with your problem to make yourself whole again , is truly a burden that has been lifted from our souls . And I know that for our family this is just the beginning . And we -- Christopher ( their son ) and I -- will be there with you every step of the way . '' The Rev . Harold Brookins , who led Barry and the other clergy members in prayer before Barry spoke , told reporters after the mayor 's statement that Barry had told him Saturday that he had a substance abuse problem . `` He came to it with humility , '' Brookins said . `` He broke down and he cried , and he said that ' I have made the decision . I 'm going for help . . . and I 'm going right away , as soon as all the logistics can be worked out . ' `` Lurma Rackley , the mayor 's press secretary , told reporters she believed Barry 's most serious problem is with alcohol . Barry was arrested Thursday night by FBI agents and charged with a misdemeanor for possession of cocaine . Agents said in an affidavit filed in court that the mayor was videotaped buying and smoking crack cocaine in a downtown hotel where he had gone to meet a longtime woman friend who had decided to cooperate with the FBI . Jay B. Stephens , the U.S. attorney for the District of Columbia , said blood and urine samples taken from the mayor after his arrest had tested positive for cocaine ingestion . If convicted , he could face a year in prison and a $ 100,000 fine . On Friday , his attorney , R. Kenneth Mundy , said Barry would plead innocent to the charges and seek a jury trial . A hearing is scheduled for Feb. 5 .