Hypertension experts gathered in Long Beach last week to present research that proves a link between sodium intake and high blood pressure for all Americans , despite claims that the relationship only affects a minority . Researchers at the Fifth International Interdisciplinary Conference on Hypertension in Blacks explained that hypertension , one of the major risk factors for coronary heart disease , is a `` populationwide problem . '' It is not limited to those who are `` salt-sensitive , '' they said , since all Americans are exposed to the same risk factors for hypertension -- smoking , obesity , alcoholism , excessive sodium intake and atherosclerosis . The current approach to reducing hypertension in the United States , said one of the leading experts , represents `` partial and incomplete strategy , '' since there is no way to test for salt-sensitivity . Although it was reported that hypertension is more likely to occur in blacks than whites -- high blood pressure affects at least 67 % of all black men between the ages of 65 and 74 and about 59 % of white males the same age -- after age 35 , at least 80 % of the Americans will have a blood pressure that is `` above optimal , '' said Dr. Jeremiah Stamler of Northwestern University in Chicago . `` As seen with cholesterol , high blood pressure is a multifactorial problem , not just a black or white problem . It is a population-wide problem . `` If the strategy remains the same and we wait for people to show the clinical signs of hypertension , we are guilty of neglect and ( exposing people to ) excess risk ( for complications of hypertension ) , '' Stamler said . Normal blood pressure is 120/80 millimeters of mercury ( mm Hg ) . This figure represents the force of blood as it pushes against the arteries when the heart pumps . It is a ratio of systolic over diastolic . Other than age and race , there are few confirmed causes for high blood pressure , which is measured at 140/90 mm Hg . Other risk factors are merely suspected . Instead of accepting that blood pressure will rise with age , Stamler hopes that intervention at an early age could eliminate the `` abnormal '' climb in blood pressure , he said . The age-induced increase , he said , is a direct result of a lifestyle and it is aggravated by a high sodium intake . `` The 'normal ' is for blood pressure to rise with age , but this rise is abnormal , '' said Stamler . `` It is complicated by the American lifestyle . Smoking and high blood pressure are among the risk factors for heart disease , but high blood pressure is pivotal -- it aggravates the other risks . . . . With blood pressure , salt is the pivotal one ( risk factor ) . '' The average American consumer gets about 10 % of his daily sodium intake from the natural salt that occurs in food . About 15 % can be attributed to the addition of salt during cooking and at the table . The overwhelming majority is derived from salt added during processing and manufacturing of food -- about 75 % . Stamler said , if Americans in general , would cut back on the amount of processed food they eat , it could potentially reduce the occurance of hypertension in the nation . And he cited recommendations from the National Research Council 's extensive `` Diet and Health Report '' and from the American Heart Assn . as support . They recommend that consumers reduce sodium intake from the current level of consumption to a `` safe and adequate '' level of 1,100 to 3,300 milligrams daily . ( One teaspoon contains 2,000 mg sodium . ) Americans have a `` clear opportunity '' to change their life expectancy , Stamler said . By making changes in food selection , it could add three and a half years to the average life span -- especially for blacks who live six to seven years fewer than whites , according to government statistics . But there has been some controversy about this advice . Opponents believe that there are other risk factors that are more important than sodium intake . They are body weight and alcohol consumption . The question was raised after interpretation of the population study Intersalt , which surveyed and studied 24-hour urine samples of more than 10,000 men and women in 32 countries . Intersalt found that sodium intake has a role in raising risk for hypertension . It also showed that in some groups body weight and alcohol use can be greater predictors of blood pressure status than sodium intake . But Stamler emphasized the salt component is the most influential . He said that the data clearly indicates that eating less salt was of benefit : In all populations , the higher the sodium intake , the greater the increase in blood pressure with age . From this , he and his colleagues concluded that a lifetime of reduced salt intake , coupled with weight maintenance and conservative alcohol consumption , could lessen a person 's chances of developing high blood pressure in old age . `` What we learned from Intersalt , '' said Dr. Clarence E. Grim , of the Charles Drew Medical Center , Los Angeles , `` is that in societies that eat very little salt , there is very little hypertension . Salt is the most critical indicator in blood pressure . We are currently eating 150 times what what we need . ''