Everybody 's buying mountain bikes . More than 70 % of the bikes sold these days are of the fat-tired variety , and while most of these never stray from the asphalt , lots of folks are heading for the hills . Across the country , that has spelled conflict with other , more established trail users , namely hikers and horseback riders . And often , the bicyclists lose out . Here in Orange County , word has come down that mountain bikers will be shut out of Upper Newport Bay Regional Park , at least for now . In some other areas , bikes are allowed on unpaved roads but are banned on narrow hiking and equestrian trails , called `` single-tracks . '' Critics complain that mountain bikers damage delicate trails and ride too fast , risking collisions with other trail users and sometimes spooking horses . But cyclists say that trail damage is actually less than that caused by equestrians and that mountain biking on the single-tracks is safe when done responsibly . One place where the parties have been able to bury their differences is Chino Hills State Park , 10,000 acres of rolling , grass-covered hills , oak groves and sycamore-lined canyons smack in the middle of one of the fastest-growing areas of the Southland . Chino Hills , which includes parts of Orange , Los Angeles , Riverside and San Bernardino counties , will someday be one of the most-visited spots in the state park system , park officials predict . But for now it remains a largely undiscovered and undeveloped bit of rural backcountry . Among those who have discovered the park -- and continue to discover it in increasing numbers -- are mountain bikers . But in January , 1989 , the state Department of Parks and Recreation released its mountain bike use policy , and single-tracks in Chino Hills were immediately closed to bikers . Trails could only be reopened under written order from department officials . District Supt . Donald Murphy , in charge of Chino Hills , set up a series of public hearings to develop a plan for joint-use trails . And , lo and behold , trail users worked together . The result : Five trails have been designated for multiple use and , pending final state approval , could be open within the month . `` Nobody wanted to lose multiple-use trails , and there was a real cooperative feeling , '' said John Kelso-Shelton , chief ranger for the park . `` We 're sort of a rarity at Chino Hills . '' Richard Cunningham , who builds custom mountain bikes in Placentia , spearheaded the effort for the cyclists . `` We all realized we were going to be seriously out of luck if we did n't work together , '' Cunningham said . After the five trails were proposed , Cunningham organized more than 30 volunteers to repair the paths , and in some sections completely rebuild them . Now , when combined with dirt roads in the park , mountain bikers will be able to choose from loop trips that vary from easy jaunts of five miles to rugged journeys of 20 miles and more . `` I do n't believe that bicycles have a place on every trail in every state park , '' Cunningham said . `` With the five trails they picked , there should be no reason to use anything else . '' Coming up at Chino Hills : Horse enthusiasts might get some trails of their own . `` The equestrians are up next , '' Cunningham said , `` and we promised to work with them . '' Meanwhile , at Orange County 's other state park , the single tracks were never closed ( regional superintendents have broad leeway under the state mountain bike policy ) . Crystal Cove State Park north of Laguna Beach is one of the most popular mountain bike spots in the county , with as many as 80 % of the users getting about on two wheels . Trail tips : Despite the efforts of Ward and Cunningham to educate riders , conflicts continue to arise because of mountain bikers who ride recklessly , endangering other trail users and damaging trails . Some simple tips will help reduce conflicts and help keep the parks open to cyclists : * Always ride on designated roads and trails . Never cut your own trail . The parks here are too heavily used to accommodate trailblazers . * Always control your speed , especially around corners . Slow down when approaching hikers , and announce your presence -- bicycles are silent . Stop to let horses pass . * Always ride on the right side of the trail . * For your own safety , wear a helmet . The fire that blackened much of Chino Hills State Park last week burned mostly grass , damaging only a few pockets of trees . Fire is part of the natural cycle here , and the park will be green again in just a few months . The park is open in the meantime , but it is especially important to remain on the trails while riding through the burn areas . Without ground cover , the soil is especially vulnerable to erosion . Lightning strikes : The recent lightning storm on Mt . Whitney that took the life of a Huntington Beach man was not an unusual occurrence . Sierra thunderstorms are quite common in summer , and there are precautions hikers can take if one approaches . First , lightning seeks out the highest point , so try to avoid peaks and ridgelines . Also , do not hold tent poles or other metal objects . Cave entrances may seem to offer refuge but can be dangerous . Some experts advise insulating yourself from the ground by sitting on a rope or sleeping pad . Sierra thunderstorms offer another danger . Since they usually strike in the afternoon , the day can dawn warm and clear . Day hikers often set off in shorts and a T-shirt , risking hypothermia -- an often fatal lowering of the body temperature -- when they are caught unawares . Jon Inskeep of the Sierra Madre Search and Rescue Team advises that when walking any distance into the wilderness , even in summer , hikers always pack a jacket and wool hat -- `` something that will keep you warm if you keep wet . '' He has pulled more than one hypothermia victim from the wilderness on days that started out bright and beautiful . Hikers , he said , are often not prepared for emergencies : `` That 's what keeps rescue teams in business , I guess . ''