When Brad Roller , president and founder of Swiger Coil Systems , a Cleveland electric motor parts maker , spoke up about the high cost of health insurance for his employees , he quickly found himself in charge of a plan to help small businesses get affordable coverage . That was nine years ago . Today , as insurance chairman for the Cleveland Chamber of Commerce 's Council of Smaller Enterprises , Roller is still fighting that fight . And Cleveland is serving as a model for other communities where small-business owners are grappling with the exorbitant costs of providing health insurance to their workers . Serious talk of state and federal health-insurance mandates have sent a chill through small businesses generally . Many business owners attending a small-business retreat in Palm Springs this month said they would be forced to lay off workers if they had to provide health insurance for everyone . The current crisis was precipitated by skyrocketing health-care costs , which have been increasing at about 15 % a year . As premiums rose and insurance companies became more selective in offering coverage , more and more small-business owners found themselves squeezed out of the affordable insurance market . Some politicians , especially Sen. Edward M. Kennedy ( D-Mass . ) , point to the shocking fact that between 31 million and 37 million Americans have no health insurance . The desperate need for affordable health insurance was the major issue tackled at the Palm Springs conference , sponsored by National Small Business United , a Washington-based grass-roots group of small-business owners . One afternoon , representatives from the medical profession , hospitals , small-business organizations , government agencies and insurance industry associations grappled with the complex challenge of providing affordable coverage . `` The insurance industry knows it ca n't be business-as-usual anymore , '' James Dorsch , Washington counsel for the Health Insurance Assn . of America , told the group . In response to the crisis , he predicted , the 1990s will be the decade when insurance companies become `` health-care managers instead of just paying the bills . '' Roller said Cleveland 's quest for affordable insurance for small businesses began in 1974 , when small-business owners organized themselves into a single group for coverage purposes and asked Blue Cross , the giant insurance provider , to offer them a discount on premiums . Blue Cross agreed to a 10 % discount , but by 1981 rising premiums were eating away at the discount and Roller was back in the fray . `` We had to do something , '' Roller said . `` Cleveland was the fourth most expensive city in the U.S. for health care . '' Today , 7,000 small and medium-sized companies participate in 14 different plans , primarily with Blue Cross but with other insurance providers as well . The plans cover 125,000 small-business employees and their dependents , who paid $ 115 million in premiums last year . `` We save our members an incredible amount of money , '' said Roller , who frequently is called upon to explain the program to other small-business leaders . `` What we are doing in Cleveland could be done by a significant number of small companies across the country , '' he said . In California , Gov . George Deukmejian recently jolted business owners by outlining a plan that would require all employers to provide some kind of health-care coverage to workers . `` Everyone will have to pitch in and give a little to make health care affordable and available , '' the state 's insurance commissioner , Roxani Gillespie , told the gathering . `` Employers will have to provide insurance or pick up the costs . '' Linda Diamond , director of the American Medical Assn . 's private sector outreach , said the AMA is seeking to reduce rates for malpractice insurance because the premiums can increase a patient 's bill by about 15 % . She said doctors now tend to order more tests before making a diagnosis because they are forced to practice `` defensive medicine . '' After the session , several business owners said they plan to take the initiative in solving the insurance problem before the government steps in . Business owners are being pressed to seek creative alternatives , including self-insurance programs designed to cut costs . One Los Angeles firm founded by a former executive at a major insurance company sets up custom-tailored insurance programs for companies with 50 to 500 employees . `` We design partially limited , self-funded insurance plans which allow small companies to do what the Fortune 500 companies have been doing for years , '' said Robert Turell , founder and chairman of Insurance Design Associates . Turell said a self-funded plan can save a company between 15 % and 20 % on its insurance costs . It works like this : The company agrees to pay the everyday costs of providing health-care services for its employees -- within certain limits . Then it buys reinsurance to cover more expensive and catastrophic claims . `` The employee gets the same benefits he had before , but in this way a firm can have tailor-made coverage and control the costs , '' Turell said . He has set up about 100 custom insurance plans in the last 3 1/2 years . He said companies also can save on administrative costs . Unlike an insurance company , which charges fees based on a percentage of total claims paid , a benefits administrator usually charges about $ 10 a month per employee to manage an insurance program . Turell , who has several major law firms as clients , said one company with 250 employees saved about $ 150,000 a year by partially self-insuring .