The rain fell softly and steadily on Stanford 's Sunken Diamond Sunday , causing the postponement of the NCAA West I Regional championship between Stanford and San Diego State , first until later Sunday afternoon and , finally , until noon today . The rain was welcomed by a weary SDSU team , a team that spent Saturday playing two emotional games , going through six pitchers , two ankles and 19 innings before finally arriving at the championship . Late Saturday night , assistant coach Gary Brown was finishing up bed checks when he laid out the ideal scenario . He mentioned the rainy forecast , and then grinned the kind of grin you use when you 're up to something . It rains Sunday , he said , and cancels the game . Then , Monday , all of the Aztec pitchers are rested and ready to go . Meanwhile , Stanford is still without ace Stan Spencer , who threw nine innings Saturday morning . Perfect . Sure enough , the Aztecs woke up to rain Sunday . First , the game was postponed from noon until 3 p.m . So the Aztecs arrived at Sunken Diamond a few minutes after 2 , when the rain had stopped . Five minutes later , it started again , heavily , and the tarp was pulled over the field . See you tomorrow , tournament officials said . `` Thank God , '' SDSU Coach Jim Dietz said . `` We 've played one extra game ( due to being in the loser 's bracket ) and gotten up for two games at 6 a.m . It will help us . Maybe it wo n't have any bearing on the game , but it wo n't hurt us . '' To win the tournament and go to the College World Series , the Aztecs ( 49-21 ) must defeat No . 1 Stanford twice . Stanford ( 55-10 ) , without a loss in this double-elimination tournament , just needs to win once . If SDSU wins at noon , it will face Stanford again today at 4 p.m . The Aztecs are coming off a day , Saturday , when they lost to Stanford , 6-2 , but turned around and defeated Southern Illinois , 4-3 , in 10 innings . So it 's easy to see why Stanford Coach Mark Marquess was disappointed with Sunday 's rainout . `` We wanted to get them today , '' Marquess said Sunday . `` They 're coming off a tough day ( Saturday ) with the doubleheader . I 'd love to play them today . But whether this is a big advantage for San Diego State or a big advantage for Stanford , I do n't know . '' By taking Sunday off , the Aztecs were able to rest , which was particularly important for their pitchers and two players with injured ankles . Second baseman Scott Dennison , the team 's leading hitter with a .362 average , sprained an ankle Saturday and would n't have played Sunday . Now , he figures to be available today . He probably wo n't start , but he should be able to be used late in a game . `` He 'll probably be 80 % ( Monday ) , '' Dietz said . `` Today , he was probably 40 % . '' Dennison spent most of Sunday taking whirlpool and ultrasound treatments . Third baseman Steve Boucher also sprained an ankle Saturday , but his was n't as bad . Boucher should be 100 % today . As for the pitching staff , Dietz said , if need be , he will use all eight pitchers in the first game and , if the Aztecs win , turn around and use all eight of them in the second game . `` I 'm serious , '' he said . Then he paused . The raindrops continued . `` I 've got a gut feeling things will be kind of interesting tomorrow , '' he said . Aztec Notes The rain is supposed to let up by this morning . . . . A last case scenario in case the rain continues is that an NCAA committee will pick this region 's representative to the College World Series , which begins Friday . Tournament director Jerry Kindall , baseball coach at the University of Arizona , said the championship could be played as late as Tuesday . He would n't speculate further , but Wednesday should also be possible . . . . SDSU will likely start Kevin Nielsen ( 4-3 , 4.53 earned-run average ) today at noon . Stanford will probably go with Brian Sackinsky ( 8-1 , 5.07 ) . . . . SDSU alumnus Joe Cusimano , who lives in the Bay area , took the team out to dinner Sunday night . `` They 're coming out of the woodwork , '' SDSU Coach Jim Dietz said . `` I 'd say that I 've actually shaken hands with or talked to , conservatively , 100 people . Just alumni , or people in some way connected with SDSU . '' Former SDSU and NFL quarterback Jesse Freitas was one . . . . Shhhh -- the Aztecs have plane and hotel reservations all set for the College World Series , as well as meal money and cash advances . If they defeat Stanford twice today , they 're scheduled to leave San Diego for Omaha , Neb . on Tuesday .