Wilderness Experience , the beleaguered Chatsworth camping gear firm , for the second time in two years has sought shelter from creditors by filing for Chapter 11 protection under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code . According to its bankruptcy filing May 5 , Wilderness Experience has assets of $ 627,400 and debts of $ 1.4 million . Among the debts are $ 43,500 owed to the accounting firm Deloitte , Haskins & Sells , and $ 6,483 to the Los Angeles Department of Water & Power . William Hess , Wilderness Experience 's attorney , said the company 's latest problems stemmed partly from its inability to deliver on time a $ 5-million shoe order to a major retailer , because Wilderness `` did n't have the capital . '' The company has also been behind in payments to its landlords , and those debts helped force its bankruptcy filing . Bernard Kramer , the company 's president , said he has closed three of the company 's six retail stores to cut costs , although its factory remains open and is manufacturing sportswear and backpacks . To help cut costs , the company has laid off about 25 workers , Kramer said , and has only about 45 employees now . `` We believe we can recapitalize the company and go forward . We will consolidate the operation by reducing overhead , going to smaller headquarters , '' Kramer said . In June , 1987 , the company filed for Chapter 11 protection and emerged from bankruptcy proceedings in April , 1988 . The company 's bank and some of its other creditors forgave 75 % of Wilderness ' debts in exchange for some of the company 's stock . Wilderness was also able to raise $ 360,000 from investors . This time , Kramer hopes to reorganize once again and emerge from bankruptcy protection by `` trying to sell or merge the company with a larger company . '' He said Wilderness still has a `` large pool of stockholders who are very interested in helping the company continue , '' and some might be willing to provide additional capital . One shareholder who wo n't invest more money is Herve Babineau of Malibu . At the urging of a friend , he bought 13,200 shares of Wilderness ' stock at 50 cents a share in hopes of catching the company on the rebound . He has since sold most of his stock at a loss . But he said , `` I 'm going to write things off , '' get a tax credit for the loss and use it to help invest in something else .