This book is a call for serious Afrikan American men to stand tall and dare to be great , dare to move beyond the limited ideas of others , dare to think for yourselves , for the future . dare to conceive a world where you are more than a consumer , a buyer a clown in purple wearing odd clothes finding glory in not being black . Author Haki R. Madhubuti offers this poem in the introduction to his book about black men . He goes on to dare black men `` to be beauty , dare to be creative first , dare to be husbands and fathers , to be quiet life fighters with a smile . . . dare . '' Madhubuti uses a variety of approaches -- poetic verses along with essays , interviews and biographical sketches -- to paint a startling portrait of black manhood , black family and black male-female relationships . His interview with a black Chicago police officer about his encounters with his own community -- and the overall attitude of young black males on the streets of that city -- offer insight into the desperate plight of young black Americans . In the tradition of Martin Luther King Jr. and Malcolm X , Madhubuti proposes solutions to the ills that plague black Americans through the restoration of the family unit and the development of an autonomous economic community . Though some of Madhubuti 's accusations against white Americans may seem questionable to the reader , such as his acceptance of the argument that the AIDS virus was developed by the World Health Organization , his book does contain concrete and practical advice on everything from finances to diet and exercise . Madhubuti 's analysis of black America is frank and earnest , and does not shy away from calling into account current black leaders . He points out that black leaders in this country seem to be above reproach and criticism . Nor does he shy away from the issue of the strong black female , stating emphatically that it is the black woman who has held the culture together . Anyone interested in viewing the black male struggle from the inside should read this book . Bruce Bean