The state Senate gave final legislative approval Friday to a bill to continue allowing the sale of a special blood product from paid donors , a law that would benefit a Sherman Oaks firm with ties to co-sponsor Assemblyman Tom Bane . The legislation , approved unanimously without discussion , would renew for three years an exemption from a state law that bans the sale of blood products from paid donors . HemaCare Corp. of Sherman Oaks , which has made campaign contributions to Bane ( D-Tarzana ) , is one of only two firms in the U.S. that sell blood platelets from paid donors , according to HemaCare officials . Platelets promote blood clotting and are used by patients undergoing heart surgery or chemotherapy . State health officials and private blood banks have long opposed the use of purchased blood , arguing that it might jeopardize public health because payment attracts indigent donors more likely to be infected with hepatitis and other diseases . The state has banned use of purchased blood in transfusions since 1974 , a spokesman said . Blood Shortage However , the state Health Services Department did not oppose the exemption because extra blood is needed to cover a shortage in Southern California , a spokesman said . Bane sponsored legislation in 1986 creating a three-year exemption from the law , allowing the use of paid platelets if blood given by volunteers was unavailable . He said Friday he intended to carry the new bill but was forced to back off because of adverse publicity over his links to HemaCare . He was listed as a co-author . Bane 's involvement generated controversy because HemaCare , located in his 40th Assembly District , has contributed $ 4,850 to Bane campaign committees over the past four years . Additionally , HemaCare 's medical director , Dr. Joshua Levy , is a longtime friend of Bane and provided important medical referrals when the lawmaker was stricken in 1984 with Guillain-Barre syndrome , a sometimes fatal ailment . Bane also drew criticism for trying to steer $ 400,000 in state funds for study of the relative safety of paid versus voluntary blood , a move critics said was intended to benefit HemaCare . Bane and HemaCare officials denied that the platelet bill , which goes to Gov . Deukmejian for his signature , is special-interest legislation designed exclusively to help the firm . `` The most important thing about this is the benefits to patients who do n't get bad blood , '' Bane said Friday . Harvest Process Lauded Bane and HemaCare insist platelets from paid donors are safer because of screening safeguards and the process used to harvest them , known as hemapheresis . Under it , enough platelets for a single transfusion can be taken from a single donor . By contrast , blood must be taken from six to 10 volunteers to get the same amount of platelets . Paid blood proponents argue that increases the chance of contamination six to 10 times . The state Health Services Department counters that studies have shown paid-donor blood is far more likely to contain hepatitis because cash rewards attract high-risk donors . They also argue that paid donors are less likely to tell the truth about their medical history during screening interviews . HemaCare argues that those studies are outdated and irrelevant because its donors are middle-class college students and hospital employees , not Skid Row denizens . The firm 's donors must be paid because the harvesting process takes several hours and involves physical discomfort , officials said . The bill was introduced by Sen. John Doolittle ( R-Rocklin ) , who has said he carried the legislation because it represents a chance to increase the safety of blood supplies .