Remember Mickey McDermott , fun-loving left-hander for the Boston Red Sox in the 1950s ? He 's suddenly a rich man . At least his wife is . Betty McDermott won close to $ 6 million in the Arizona lottery last month . She and her husband will receive $ 220,000 in post-tax earnings for the next 20 years . Mickey told the Boston Globe , `` It 's the luck of the Irish . I feel like I just fanned DiMaggio in the ninth inning with the bases loaded . '' Add McDermott : He was a free-spender as a player when he haunted the piano bars , but his wife said , `` I get the checks , and I 've got him on an allowance . '' Mickey said , `` That 's right . She gave me a $ 5 bill and a white shirt , and she told me not to change either one of them . '' More McDermott : He batted over .300 three times with the Red Sox , and he said he heard that Ted Williams and Dominic DiMaggio once went to owner Tom Yawkey and said , `` Look , if you take the kid and put him at first or in the outfield , you 'll have him for 20 years . If you leave him on the mound , the other three days he 'll be in a nightclub somewhere , singing . '' Trivia time : Who was Joe DiMaggio 's first wife ? It Had-to-Happen Dept : As Greg Norman addressed a chip on the first playoff hole at Doral , CBS analyst Ken Venturi said , `` I would take the flagstick out . '' Norman left it in and sank the shot . Tim Simpson , next up , took the flagstick out and rolled the ball over the cup . Now-It-Can-Be-Told Dept . : Kevin Johnson , who played in his first NBA All-Star game this year , was asked if he asked Phoenix teammate Tom Chambers , a former All-Star MVP , for any advice before the game . `` Yes , '' Johnson said . `` Tom just told me to get him the ball as much as I can . '' In a nutshell : Trainer Wayne Lukas tells about a cross-country flight he took with weight-conscious jockey Laffit Pincay : `` Leaving California , Pincay ate one half of an unsalted peanut . When we arrived in New York five hours later , he ate the other half . '' Scoring big : Said former King Bernie Nicholls after scoring his first goal for the New York Rangers : `` I 've had high tea at the Waldorf . I 've had dinner at the Tavern on the Green . I 've scored at the Garden . All I need now is a limo to take me around town and I 'll be all right . '' Now-You-Know Dept . : From the Chicago Sun-Times : `` The bar in Harry Caray 's restaurant is 60 feet 6 inches , the distance from home plate to the pitcher 's mound . '' Careful : Charley Walters of the St. Paul Pioneer Dispatch said that one major league executive , a critic of the owners ' stand in negotiations , was overheard saying , `` To call the owners dumb is an insult to dumb people . '' Trivia answer : Dorothy Arnold , a New York actress . Quotebook : Dick Motta , coach of the Sacramento Kings , on team harmony : `` I do n't like a guy to talk back to me , but I 'd rather have a guy who 's mad at me when I pull him than if he 's going to be a ( wimp ) all of his life . '' HARLEY TINKHAM