If all the chronicles of earthly life were recorded with such drama , flair and wit , the world would be filled with history majors . This fascinating and factual historical romance , rooted in the real life and hard times of 14th-Century Europe scarred almost beyond recognition by the Black Plague , is a richly brocaded text that illumines this barely civilized but highly charged pre-Renaissance period . Similar in some ways to Barbara Tuchman 's stately but more academic `` A Distant Mirror , '' which meticulously delineates that same period but uses instead the life of a nobleman to personalize the record , Judith Merkle Riley in her `` A Vision of Light '' plucks one imaginary woman from those hazard-strewn days and follows her perilous journey to selfhood . No mean feat for a woman in those days . But Margaret was no ordinary woman . Margaret of Ashbury , unusual in her struggle to learn -- even high-born women were illiterate in medieval times and some even rather proud of it -- is an early model of determination coupled with tenderness , the ideal marriage of both her masculine and feminine natures . From childhood on , Margaret manages to retain her goodness , her faith in God and her grit . Added to these uncommon character traits is her gift for healing , which manifested itself as a light one day in an abandoned church not far from a hut in the forest where she lived with a midwife named Hilde . This encounter occurred while she was recovering from her near death during childbirth . Once well again , thanks to Hilde 's herbs and potions , the two women and Hilde 's idiot but harmless teen-age son embark on a journey that plunges them into perilous adventures and new opportunities to follow their independent natures . Thanks to her basic intelligence and powers of observation , Margaret is an apt pupil , and in time both of them earn well-deserved good reputations as midwives . Margaret 's gift of healing and her charitable nature produces a loyal following of those who love and admire her . She also generates a following among those who fear and envy her . Notable are bishops in the church , who perceive her gift as a threat to their authority and control and take steps to eliminate her . Her cruel first husband -- long thought dead in the plague -- turns up to haunt her too . But Margaret 's healing gift finally brings her to a love-blessed marriage with a much older man who sees nothing at all unusual in her wanting to learn to read and write . With the help of Brother Gregory , an impoverished priest who serves as her scribe , Margaret of Ashbury pours out the story of her dangerous , exciting and variegated life , and we follow her every step of the way . `` A Vision of Light '' is a first novel for author Riley , who teaches government studies at Claremont McKenna College and the Claremont Graduate School of California . Most of her research for the book was done at the Huntington Library .