In 20 years of prison work , the only time John L. Clark was assaulted was when he was a Roman Catholic priest . `` So much for the image of prisons and priests , '' said Clark , who has been warden of the maximum-security federal penitentiary here since January . `` I 've been spat on a few times , but never assaulted working in corrections , '' said Clark , who left the priesthood to marry in 1974 and began his corrections career in the same year . `` My only assault was when I was a chaplain in a mental hospital . '' The prison at Marion , the federal system 's only Level 6 penitentiary , is roughly what Alcatraz was until it was closed in the 1960s . It is home to what officials call the `` predators , '' 400 convicts considered incorrigible . It contains a few famous criminals , such as Colombian drug smuggler Carlos Lehder and American spies Jonathan Pollard and John Walker Jr. Mostly , it holds the baddest of the bad : inmates that other federal and state prisons can not handle . Clark , 47 , is informal and talkative , very aware of public relations and matter of fact about being a priest turned jailer . `` I ca n't think of any time I 've had to make a choice between any ideal that I have and some operational decision we had to make in prison , '' he said . This is Clark 's second tour of duty at Marion . He has been transferred seven times since he joined what he calls the federal prisons `` merry-go-round '' 16 years ago . He holds two master 's degrees and believes in corrections -- Marion style . `` People say Marion is inhumane . I say , put in the larger context , it makes the whole system operate in a more humane fashion , '' Clark said , because `` inmates in other institutions can go to bed at night with both eyes closed because these people are here . '' The average stay at Marion is three years , Clark said . Every inmate has his own cell -- and every cell has a television . It 's probably the only prison in the nation that is not overcrowded . Some prisoners are confined to their cells 22 hours a day ; the rest have a bit more freedom , but not much . Critics have said that Marion 's strict regimen has forced the 50-odd other federal correctional institutions to be tougher , but Clark disagreed . `` As a system we do n't run this kind of restrictive operation , '' Clark said . `` For the most part , we take more criticism for being so open and liberal in the way we run our prisons . '' Clark said that Marion is a model for many state prisons and that it will `` go down in the annals of corrections as an historic development . '' Marion , he said , is the system 's safety valve . `` The federal system has 55,000 prisoners , and had only 24,000 in 1981 , '' Clark said . `` That increase is happening at the state level , too , and you hear of inmates dominating some facilities . It 's not happening at the federal level , and one reason is Marion . `` They ( inmates ) go out to other prisons . They do n't get in trouble and they do n't come back to Marion , '' Clark said . The penitentiary , on 1,000 acres surrounded by the Crab Orchard National Wildlife Refuge in southern Illinois , looks like a modern factory except for the spools of glistening razor wire that surround it .. Marion has had publicity -- mostly bad . Nine inmates and two guards were killed there between February , 1980 , and October , 1983 . Five inmates have been killed since then . One inmate filed a class-action lawsuit alleging that Marion amounted to `` cruel and unusual punishment , '' a violation of the Eighth Amendment . Clark grew up in Jackson , Mich. , home to the State Prison of Southern Michigan , a 5,000-inmate facility that claims to be the largest walled prison in the world . Clark said he does not want Marion to hide behind walls . `` We ca n't hide behind the walls of the prisons and run our prisons in a vacuum , '' Clark said . `` We are a public agency with an important social mission . We need to be out there helping people understand . '' `` It ( public relations ) is being given a tremendous emphasis now '' in the federal prison system , Clark said `` I feel comfortable with that . . . . I think ( the priesthood ) was good preparation . A priest is not just dealing with individual communicants , he deals with the public arena all the time . '' Clark scoffed at the warden stereotype that is portrayed in movies such as `` Cool Hand Luke '' and `` Escape from Alcatraz . '' `` Most of the people I know who are good correctional administrators got into the work to help people . They may not have come out of the clergy , but they are human-oriented individuals , '' Clark said . `` Those who come in with a hard-line , militaristic type of approach are not successful and do not become wardens . ''