President Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle reached an agreement at a private meeting earlier this month on conditions under which the vice president would become acting President if Bush became incapacitated , White House Press Secretary Marlin Fitzwater said Friday . Fitzwater said Bush was in `` excellent health , '' and `` there is no expectation of having to use these procedures . '' But he said the issue of succession was raised `` to make sure all those involved in this process are aware of the procedures , and that everyone was aware of the consultations that would have to be made . '' He said the President and vice president were joined by First Lady Barbara Bush , White House Chief of Staff John H. Sununu , White House counsel C. Boyden Gray and Burton Lee II , the President 's physician . A representative of the Secret Service and Susan Porter Rose , Mrs. Bush 's chief of staff , also attended , Fitzwater said . The 30-minute meeting , which was kept off Bush 's public schedule , was held on April 18 , he said . The existence of the meeting was disclosed in a Washington Post story Friday . The procedure for determining when a vice president should step in for an incapacitated President is addressed in the 25th Amendment to the Constitution , which was ratified in 1967 . But there has been concern about gray areas , illustrated by Woodrow Wilson 's continued service after he was incapacitated by a stroke in the final year of his presidency , and the confusion that enveloped the White House immediately after President Ronald Reagan was shot eight years ago . Fitzwater said the meeting resulted in `` no document , no guidelines , no implementation orders of any kind , '' and that no special agreement was reached between the President and vice president . Rather , Bush , Quayle and the others reviewed the procedures that would be followed -- `` who had to do what '' -- should Bush become incapacitated and unable to instruct Quayle to take over as acting President . The 25th Amendment specifies that in such circumstances , the vice president and a majority of the Cabinet would declare in writing that the President is unable to carry out his duties , and the vice president would become acting President .