A fare war broke out Thursday among airlines serving major California cities , giving consumers discount air fares not seen since the days before PSA and AirCal were bought by major carriers . The intensified competition in the nation 's busiest air corridor between Southern and Northern California came as American Airlines slashed fares and other big carriers said they will match them . American 's new discount fares -- as low as $ 29 one-way between Northern California and Ontario Airport in San Bernardino County -- spurred other big carriers , including USAir and United Airlines , to say they will match them . 'We Will Match It ' '' Where we compete with American , we will match it , '' a United spokesman said . USAir said it would announce details of matching fares today . American is not the first carrier in recent months to announce low fares on limited routes in the California market . But American 's announcement is the first wide-scale price cut , particularly on the Los Angeles-to-San Francisco route . Its new fares go into effect May 1 . American put most emphasis on its $ 98 , seven-day advanced purchase , round-trip fare from Los Angeles International , Burbank and Orange County to San Francisco or San Jose . Those are the most popular routes that `` we think peo ple will pay attention to , '' American spokesman Ed Stewart said . Those routes will also feature a new , one-day advanced purchase fare of $ 118 round trip . Currently , the lowest seven-day advanced purchase fare for major carriers flying between Los Angeles and San Francisco is $ 124 round trip . The regular unrestricted fare is $ 296 round trip . `` This is best for the average person , and the smaller companies on very tight budgets will obviously benefit , '' said Gordon Erenberg , manager of the Ask Mr. Foster travel agency in Century City . Business travelers -- the most frequent fliers along the busy routes -- were among the most vocal last winter when major carriers raised fares . In particular , some businesses were pleased to see a cut in the rate for one-day advanced purchase . `` It 's better than it was ; it 's been costing us $ 296 , '' said Nancy Godfrey , travel manager for Chevron Oil Co. '' If the client is flexible , how can you beat it , '' said Marilyn Rosensweig , an agent with Century 21 Travel in Tarzana . Passengers always benefit from discounting that affects several airlines , she said , `` but the problem is with people who buy tickets in advance and have to cancel . The rules are so restrictive and they do n't always remember what you told them about the restrictions . '' Mike Heffer , senior staff member of San Francisco-based Consumer Action , said the fare restrictions dampen the good news somewhat because many people traveling between San Francisco and Los Angeles ca n't make advanced reservations , but `` we certainly welcome any sign of price competition in the San Francisco-Los Angeles market . It 's been a long time coming . '' There are more than 200 flights a day between Northern and Southern California , shuttling thousands of people between the state 's population centers . While most carriers are expected to match the fares , airline industry analysts said they do not believe that the discounting signals the beginning of a protracted and vicious fare war . `` Everyone loses in a fare war . No one is more conscious of that than American , '' said Edmond Greenslet , an analyst with ESG Aviation Services in Greenwich , Conn. '' This is a local tactic , not a broad-based strategy , '' he said , explaining that , generally , air fares are rising throughout the nation . American has a smaller share of the intrastate market than United or USAir , he said . `` American is under no illusion that they wo n't match the fare , but the advantage is that it gives American name recognition and it buys them good will , '' he said . American has also recently established a new hub at San Jose in an attempt to make it an alternative to San Francisco , he said . The fare announcement is `` part of a marketing strategy to heighten attention to San Jose , '' he added . American 's Stewart said , `` The bottom line is that this is what our marketing folks said we had to do to remain competitive . '' The first fare cutting began with Dallas-based Southwest Airlines . It announced a $ 98 unrestricted , round-trip fare , beginning on May 15 , for flights between Ontario and Oakland and San Diego and Oakland . It will also offer a $ 58 , 21-day advanced purchase ticket for those routes . American 's announcement is `` their reaction to our introductory fares , '' said Charlotte Goddard , a Southwest spokesman . In addition to the other reductions , American is matching Southwest 's fares with the $ 58 , 21-day advanced purchase ticket between Northern California and Ontario , and between Orange County and San Jose . It will also offer an unrestricted $ 198 round-trip fare between Burbank and San Jose ; Los Angeles International and San Francisco or San Jose ; and from Orange County to San Francisco or San Jose . However , the fare will be available for only a limited number of seats on each flight , Stewart said . California consumers have seen steadily increasing rates for intrastate travel since USAir bought PSA and American bought AirCal in 1987 . Rates rose throughout the country as deregulation spurred a wave of airline mergers , decreasing competition . When PSA was purchased , consumers could buy a full-fare , round-trip ticket between San Francisco and Los Angeles for $ 140 . In addition to increases last year , the major carriers in January raised fares an additional 15 % , bringing the regular Los Angeles-San Francisco round-trip fare to $ 296 .