Thrift regulator James M. Cirona , offered the chief executive job at troubled Great American Bank last week , wo n't be taking the position . Cirona , president of the Federal Home Loan Bank of San Francisco , expressed strong interest in the Great American job , but he and the thrift 's board could not agree on terms of an employment contract , sources close to the negotiations said Friday . Directors at San Diego-based Great American considered as excessive Cirona 's compensation demands , totaling up to $ 1 million a year , the sources said . Cirona , 58 , sought financial guarantees from Great American should the capital-weakened thrift be taken over by regulators . He also wanted 600,000 shares of Great American stock , worth $ 1.125 million at current prices , and a lifetime pension of $ 250,000 for each year after his retirement , sources said . Neither Cirona , formerly the Western region 's top S & L regulator , nor Great American Bank officials would comment on Cirona 's withdrawal from consideration for the job . Cirona 's decision was outlined in a Federal Home Loan Bank staff bulletin dated Thursday . Cirona 's withdrawal left unclear whom Great American may try to hire to fill the chief executive slot now held by Gordon C. Luce , who is also chairman . Great American considered offering the job to its general counsel , Marc Sandstrom , and to board member and former Senior Vice President Thomas F. Carter , before deciding upon Cirona , sources said . Sources said Luce had planned to announce his retirement at Great American 's annual shareholders meeting on May 24 , but that he may delay that announcement if no successor is decided upon by then . Luce , who turns age 65 in November , was unavailable for comment Friday . Hiring Cirona was designed to give Great American credibility with the federal Office of Thrift Supervision . Until the OTS was created last August , its examiners worked directly for Cirona . Now , the Federal Home Loan Bank of San Francisco 's chief function is to supply credit to mortgage lenders in its 11th District , which includes California , Nevada and Arizona . Great American Bank needs that credibility given that it is operating under intense OTS scrutiny . Unless it can drastically shrink assets , raise $ 350 million in outside capital or find a buyer for all or part of its assets by year-end , Great American may be seized . Heavy 1989 losses left Great American with a severely weakened capital position . Its so-called tangible capital of $ 128 million as of March 30 is about half the minimum amount required by regulators . Tangible capital is one measure of a thrift 's financial cushion against losses . A look at Great American 's first-quarter 1990 results released earlier this weak showed that its loan problems continue to deteriorate by several measures . The S & L also disclosed that it is involved in a dispute with the OTS that could result in asset writedowns of up to $ 65 million in the second quarter , if the agency prevails . Cirona was also seen as an attractive hire because he has extensive experience running troubled thrifts . Before being named in 1983 to the Federal Home Loan Bank of San Francisco , the largest of the 12 regional home loan banks , Cirona was chief executive of the $ 2.6-billion First Federal Savings & Loan Assn . of Rochester , N.Y. That thrift was created through the consolidation of several troubled thrifts and received financial aid from the now-defunct Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp. Times staff writer James Bates contributed to this story .