The story line for Saturday 's sloppy San Diego Section Division I girls ' basketball championship -- or , more appropriately , the Betty Crocker Game of the Day ( 41 turnovers were produced ) -- was set by halftime . And by game 's end , the theme was clear . Mira Mesa made just three field goals . Three . Not surprisingly , Point Loma won the title , 44-25 , at the Sports Arena . What was surprising was that Mira Mesa , after making just one first-half field goal , trailed by just four at halftime , 16-12 . And for all intents and purposes , the Marauders were in the game until the end of the third quarter . But the final numbers were haunting : Mira Mesa was three of 30 from the field ( 10 % ) . The Marauders made more three-point attempts ( two ) than two-point attempts ( one ) . And pestered by a tight Point Loma man-to-man defense throughout , they turned the ball over 25 times . `` It was an ugly , ugly game , but it was a great defensive game for us , '' Point Loma Coach Lee Trepanier said . `` They had no man-to-man offense , which was really too bad because they 're a better team than that . '' Indeed , when unguarded , Mira Mesa shot very well : 17 of 22 from the free throw line ( 77 % ) . That 's why the Marauders were able to hang with Point Loma as long as they did . Tweet Castillo made a three-point shot and a two-pointer , and Carrie Carambas added another three-pointer . Other than that , it was all free throws . Mira Mesa Coach Gary Blevins was at a loss to explain . `` We took a lot of shots , they just would n't fall for us , '' he said . `` Point Loma was very aggressive , so we shot a lot of free throws . But the other shots just rolled off the rim for us . '' Point Loma was n't all that much better . The Pointers were 17 of 54 ( 32 % ) from the field and seven of 15 ( 47 % ) from the free throw line . But Point Loma had Monica Filer , a slick 5-foot-6 point guard , to direct the offense and Tyeast Brown , an aggressive 6-0 center , to control the inside . Filer was the game 's leading scorer with 20 points , and Brown grabbed 21 rebounds to go with 10 points . `` I was real nervous , '' Filer said . `` I did n't settle down until halfway through the first quarter . '' Chris Drumm added 10 points for Point Loma .