The accused triggerman in the `` Cotton Club '' trial had murder charges against him dropped Wednesday in an unrelated case when Los Angeles Police Department ballistics tests linking him to the murder weapon proved inconclusive . Municipal Judge David Horwitz dismissed a single count of murder against Alex Marti , 29 , of Sherman Oaks on a motion made by prosecutors , who argued that new ballistics tests undermined their case against Marti . Deputy Dist . Atty . Sally Thomas said Marti had been charged with providing a gun to another man who allegedly shot to death reputed drug dealer Rene Vega in August , 1987 , in Bel-Air . LAPD Tests After the slaying , authorities recovered a .45-caliber handgun that Marti had allegedly once sold and that they believed was the murder weapon . Initial ballistics tests by the LAPD tied that gun to the Vega slaying , but more recent tests showed that the gun was not the murder weapon , Thomas said . The reputed triggerman , Rod Colombo , and another man who allegedly aided in the killing , Scott Ashley , are still being prosecuted for Vega 's murder . It was the second time this year that the prosecution had asked a judge to dismiss murder charges against a defendant because of faulty ballistics tests by the LAPD crime lab . Rickey Ross , a former Los Angeles County Sheriff 's Department deputy , was charged with murder in connection with a series of prostitute killings earlier this year , but then was released from jail after new tests showed the gun was not the murder weapon . Rickey Ross Case Cited '' When we found out about the misanalysis in the Rickey Ross case , we decided to have another comparison done '' in the Marti case , prosecutor Thomas said . Attorneys for Marti had the gun tested at the same lab that ruled out Ross ' gun and tests performed by the Sheriff 's Department lab confirmed that the gun could not be positively linked to the killing . `` I 'm not going to go forward in a case in which I do n't think there 's enough evidence , '' Thomas said . `` This was n't a Rickey Ross case where we had no other evidence , but we had slight other evidence , not enough . '' Aside from the ballistics evidence , prosecutors relied on statements by a key witness in the `` Cotton Club '' murder case , Lyle Kreutzer , who implicated Marti in both killings .