A report filed Tuesday in U.S. Bankruptcy Court here concludes that more than $ 7 million that a Beverly Hills thrift gave Parker North American Corp. to invest ended up instead as cashier 's checks made out to former Chairman Michael E. Parker , his family and business associates , and to a Lake Tahoe casino and a Newport Beach auto dealership . Columbia Savings & Loan Assn . of Beverly Hills gave the money to Parker North American to invest in equipment leasing deals . But the examiner 's report concludes that the thrift was misled by Parker North American into investing in fictitious deals . Parker , 42 , is a prominent Newport Beach businessman and was chairman of Parker North American until the day before it filed for bankruptcy in March , 1989 . Parker North American leased equipment such as automated teller machines to banks and savings and loans . Parker is now chairman of Parker Automotive Corp. in Costa Mesa , a publicly held manufacturer of engine-cleaning products . Parker North American is the subject of several lawsuits alleging fraud and is also under investigation by the FBI and the Internal Revenue Service . The FBI has questioned Parker and at least one of his business associates . Parker did not return phone calls Tuesday . In earlier interviews , however , he has denied any wrongdoing . The bankruptcy examiner , accountant Robert Poyourow of Los Angeles , said Tuesday that his report stops short of concluding the Columbia money was transferred wrongfully to bank accounts outside Parker North American . It will take more research to determine if any wrongdoing occurred , he said . A bankruptcy court hearing is scheduled Oct. 18 to discuss the report and determine whether the judge will ask Poyourow to continue the investigation . Poyourow examined 10 leases involving 17 transactions between 1984 and 1988 . The FBI has seized those and other documents , according to court records . Of the 17 transactions , Poyourow 's report says , documents showed the value of 11 `` were inflated '' and the investments were worth less than Columbia was led to believe . Six of the transactions were `` fictitious in that they did not exist or were never consummated '' by Parker . In two instances , Parker had leased different equipment from what it had told Columbia . And , in one case , the same investment had been sold not only to Columbia but to another investor as well , the report says . Columbia was declared insolvent and new management installed by federal regulators this year for reasons unrelated to the Parker North American investments . The thrift invested $ 31 million with Parker North American , and now alleges in a suit in federal court in Los Angeles that the company stole at least $ 13 million of that amount . Parker wo n't comment directly on the suit . But he has suggested that Columbia , which is being sued by the federal government for allegedly squandering funds , is trying to shift blame for its own troubles onto him . Almost $ 4 million of the Columbia money went to Parker from whoever took the Columbia checks to local banks and converted them to cashier 's checks . At least 11 of them were made out to Parker and dozens more checks were made out to other people , the report said . Brian W. Fink of Orange , a former Parker North American vice president , got 11 checks totaling $ 850,000 . Fink could not be reached for comment . Ten checks totaling $ 1.4 million went to Jeffrey S. Worthy of Downey , the former Columbia vice president who oversaw the thrift 's investments in Parker North American . Worthy could n't be reached for comment , but he denied in an earlier interview that the payments were kickbacks from Parker to look the other way on the lease deals . Worthy said Parker paid him for business deals unrelated to Columbia . The examiner 's report also found that : * Gilbert Fuentes , Worthy 's former boss at Columbia as chief financial officer , got one check for $ 200,000 in 1986 . Fuentes , who left Columbia in late 1985 , could not be reached for comment . * Harrah 's Tahoe casino in Lake Tahoe received a $ 100,000 cashier 's check in 1986 endorsed by Parker , the report says . Fink also signed over one of his $ 50,000 checks to the casino in 1985 . * William E. Parker of Irvine , Michael Parker 's father and a former employee of Parker North American , got two checks totaling $ 494,000 in 1985 and 1986 . * Cindy S. Juranek , Parker 's wife , received a check for $ 79,308 in 1986 . Karen M. Parker , Parker 's ex-wife , got a $ 100,000 check in 1987 a few months after Michael Parker married Juranek . William and Karen Parker could not be reached . * A check for $ 46,000 went to Beach Imports , a Newport Beach imported auto dealership , in 1985 .