Moving fast after obtaining the first murder conviction in California based on genetic fingerprinting , Ventura County prosecutors have already introduced similar genetic evidence in two other cases and plan to rely increasingly on the scientific breakthrough in the coming year . One of the cases that has already reached the trial stage involves a Ventura oil field worker named Larry D. Davis , 29 , accused of murdering Dawn Holman , 20 , of Oxnard in August , 1988 . The other case , still in early hearing stages , is that of David Luna , 42 , a Mexican national who is accused of raping a Ventura County woman in December while she was unconscious . According to prosecutors , part of the evidence in both cases includes DNA samples drawn from semen found on the victims that matches the genetic cell pattern of the defendants . Vincent J. O'Neill Jr. , chief deputy district attorney , said the use of genetic fingerprinting in major felony cases `` is going to increase steadily '' in Ventura County in the wake of the Sept. 13 murder conviction of Lynda Axell . Axell , 35 , was found guilty largely because of DNA tests that matched her hair with strands of hair found near the body of George White , 63 , who was stabbed to death during an attempted robbery at a Ventura hamburger stand last year . A First in State The Axell case was the first in California to make use of such evidence . A state appellate court will review the case , possibly paving the way for routine use of the method throughout the state . `` The use of genetic fingerprinting will increase most rapidly once there is state legislation passed establishing regional testing labs throughout the state and once the appellate courts uphold it as a valid tool , '' O'Neill said Wednesday . O'Neill said that while genetic fingerprinting may ultimately be as commonly used by prosecutors as fingerprinting itself , one limiting factor at this stage is the cost of hiring experts on DNA cell matters -- about $ 13,000 in the Axell case . `` We will be using it more and more , '' he said . `` But in a case that is otherwise strong -- where DNA evidence would make it an absolute cinch for conviction -- there might be some hesitancy because of the extra cost . '' O'Neill said he believes that the hesitancy will gradually fade as the use of genetic evidence becomes more commonplace and less costly .