The unwanted mountain , crisscrossed by dirt-bike trails and littered with trash and old tires , rises up out of South-Central Los Angeles , sprawling across several hundred empty acres of state-owned land . It is literally a mountain of dirt . And over the last 15 years or so , it and the open fields around it have become an illegal playground for motorbikes and other off-road vehicle users , as well as a place to dump rubbish . This land south of Imperial Highway , between Normandie and Western avenues , was cleared for the $ 2-billion Century Freeway project . The state got the mountain free because California Department of Transportation engineers thought they were going to need fill dirt on the freeway project . So , when Southwest College was built at Imperial and Western , the state asked for the dirt excavated from the campus building site . They got it , all 150,000 to 200,000 cubic yards . Now Caltrans has decided it no longer needs the dirt , and the future of the mountain is uncertain , according to Paul In , a Caltrans engineer . At first the state was going to run the freeway right through where the mountain now stands , he said . `` Our original alignment took the dirt out , '' In explained . However , Caltrans is now looking for ways to cut costs and leaving the dirt in place may be one way to save money , he said . It could be cheaper to reroute the highway around the mountain . That news does n't make Father David O'Connell happy , not one bit . O'Connell , a normally cheery Irishman , gets angry when he talks about the mountain and its impact on St. Frances X Cabrini Catholic Church and parish school . The church and school are in the shadow of the mountain and , day in and day out , the motorbikes snarling up and down makeshift trails make it hard to teach the children and conduct Mass , the priest has told state officials . He wants the noise abated by a wall or screen of trees . In addition , the exploding gopher populations that are migrating from the dirt mountain into the Cabrini baseball diamond have ruined the field , O'Connell said . There are 300 students enrolled in the elementary school , but no ball field to play on . `` We 're trying to have a place for the children to play , but we ca n't do it , not with all of this , '' O'Connell said as he gestured toward the abandoned field pocked by gopher holes . `` And that is n't all , they use that mountain for a dump , '' he added , pointing to refuse , piles of old tires and other debris directly behind the church . `` Another thing that concerns us is that they 've found hazardous wastes under the mountain , '' O'Connell said . He is concerned that toxic waste from an old dump may be kicked up in the dust clouds if and when the mountain is finally hauled away . As O'Connell talked about his concerns recently , a pickup truck drove up one of the mountain 's muddy , makeshift roads and two young men unloaded a four-wheel all-terrain vehicle . They had come out for a spin . `` I 've been coming here since I was 9 or 10 , '' Rocky Baggett , 23 , yelled over the roar of the engine . The Carson resident said he comes here often , adding : `` It 's a real popular place to ride . '' With that he zoomed up the hill and out of sight . When confronted with the priest 's complaints , Caltrans officials agree only that the mountain belongs to the state . They are reluctant to say that it is causing problems . But they also are looking into O'Connell 's complaints . `` We are studying what to do , '' said Caltrans Deputy District Director Conrad Barber . Efforts have been made to chase away the gophers but he conceded they `` have n't been too successful . '' As for the dirt bikes that flock to the area on weekends , Caltrans spokesman In said , `` That 's a law enforcement problem . It 's difficult to keep ( the dirt bikers ) out . '' The area is posted and it 's against the law to trespass or dump refuse in the area , state police officials said . However , they do n't have the manpower or equipment to enforce the law . The uncertainty over the route and at what level the freeway will be built through the area means that no decisions can be made yet on the dirt mountain , In said . As for the toxic waste , he said the site was an unauthorized dump before Caltrans bought it and does contain `` heavy metals . '' No decision has been made on how this problem is to be handled , he said .