With no games for more than two months , the soccer players of the U.S. national team have faced stiffer opposition off the field than on it . Whether that has made them battle-tested , or just battle-weary , will be revealed tonight , when they play for the first time since qualifying last November for this summer 's World Cup . Their first-round opponent in the Marlboro Cup at the Orange Bowl is a familiar one , Costa Rica , which has even less World Cup experience than the United States . The United States last played in the world 's most prestigious soccer tournament in 1950 ; Costa Rica will be making its first appearance . Costa Rica , like the United States , qualified from the Central and North American and Caribbean region . They split two games last year , the United States losing at San Jose , Costa Rica , 1-0 , and winning at St. Louis , 1-0 . But Costa Rica finished the five-team , eight-game qualifying tournament with a better record . In tonight 's second game , Uruguay plays Colombia , two respected South American teams that also qualified for the World Cup . The winners will meet Sunday night for the championship , after the losers play for third place . With four World Cup teams involved , there is more interest than usual for an exhibition tournament in the United States . Applying for credentials were 265 reporters from 18 countries . `` In the first Marlboro Cup of Miami in 1986 , this was the number of fans we had , '' one of the organizers , Noel Lemon , said this week at a news conference . He predicted a crowd of more than 30,000 each night at the Orange Bowl . U.S. Coach Bob Gansler said he has been pleased with his team 's practices , although it is difficult to predict if off-the-field distractions will affect the players on the field in their first game since Nov. 19 . The players claim they have a common enemy , the U.S. Soccer Federation , but some of the resentment appears to be spilling over into their relationships with each other . Twelve of the 16 players offered $ 26,000 to $ 40,000 12-month contracts by the federation in December have signed , but most say they did so reluctantly and are still dissatisfied with the terms . Offers were withdrawn to two players , midfielder Paul Caligiuri of Santa Monica and reserve goalkeeper David Vanole of Manhattan Beach , who did not sign by the Jan. 14 deadline . Caligiuri , who scored the goal against Trinidad and Tobago that put the United States into the World Cup , remained with the team on a $ 40-per-diem basis , but Vanole has not been invited to return . Two others , goalkeeper Tony Meola and midfielder John Harkes , both of Kearny , N.J. , have not signed their contracts . The federation gave them extensions , explaining that the players were unable to review the contracts while trying out earlier this month with an English first-division team . But other players complain that the federation is giving them special treatment . Some players also complained when four teammates -- Meola , Harkes , Hugo Perez and Tab Ramos -- received $ 250 each to do advertisements for Turner Network Television 's World Cup coverage . Gansler has attempted to relieve the tension by forming a five-player committee to report grievances to him . The players were allowed to select two committee members . One of their picks was Harkes .