Oleg Cassini seemed to have it all : a designer with a glorious past ( married to Gene Tierney , once engaged to Grace Kelly , designer to Jacqueline Kennedy during her White House years ) and a ubiquitous presence ( his name is on everything from evening gowns to socks ) . But something was missing . He did n't have a fragrance to call his own . As far as he is concerned , `` a designer without a fragrance is like a knight without a horse . '' ( A discontinued scent bearing Cassini 's name was introduced in 1979 and produced by Beecham Cosmetics , according to the Fragrance Foundation . ) Sitting in a patio chair at the Hotel Bel-Air , the lithe , silver-maned designer says he obtained all natural ingredients -- such as jasmine , chrysanthemum , carnation , amber and Bulgarian Rose -- and the crystal for the bottles from two French firms . To blind-test his composition , he turned to 3,000 women in the United States . Only after 75 improvements ( one for each of his years , it turns out ) , was the designer ready to put his name , Cassini , on a fragrance that he calls `` 100 % mine . '' Along with his memorable Jackie clothes , including the famous Inauguration Day beige pillbox hat and coat , Cassini claims a number of `` firsts . '' He was the first designer to put his name on licensed merchandise ( for which he earned the title `` Cassini the Greedy '' ) and the first to give men colored shirts -- all of which is chronicled in his 1987 autobiography , `` In My Own Fashion . '' Cassini says he also changed Grace Kelly 's appearance . `` I created the 'Grace Kelly look ' for her because she was so poorly dressed . Grace was trying to give the impression she was a serious actress . She was purposely dressing badly . '' As for Tierney : `` She was of the school that everyone could be a designer . She designed her own clothes and that was a disaster . '' After Cassini took charge , both women `` won awards as best dressed , '' he says . ( Tierney first appeared on Eleanor Lambert 's International Best Dressed List in 1951 , Kelly in 1955 , just about the time each severed her personal relationship with the designer . ) Cassini continues to `` design in Italy and America , '' but primarily he oversees an enormous franchise fashion empire . He calculates that in the United States alone , retail sales of his men 's and women 's clothing , all made under licensee agreements , are $ 400 million . Of all his past and present glories Cassini regards one with special fondness . `` The best period for me as a creative person was with Jackie . Out of about 300 garments he designed for her , `` the greatest departure from tradition were the beige coat and little pillbox . Everyone else was in furs and looked like big bears . She looked so fresh , so pretty . '' While Cassini did n't have to convince Jackie this was the right choice for the occasion , he remembers having to convince President Kennedy a few times . A case in point was a black velvet gown , with one bare shoulder , which Cassini defended by telling the President : Jackie 's shoulders were so lovely `` she should expose not only one but both . '' If all goes as planned , Cassini 's `` soft power '' fragrance , which he introduced to admiring fans earlier this week in Nordstrom 's Westside Pavilion store , will grace the shoulders of women in 17 countries . Prices range from $ 35 for a 1.7-ounce eau de parfum to $ 195 for a one-ounce bottle of perfume .