Three more dead sea lions washed ashore in Orange County Wednesday , bringing to 23 the number of beached carcasses found in the last two weeks . One dead sea lion was found in Huntington Beach Wednesday morning , according to the National Marine Fisheries Service . Another washed up in Sunset Beach and a third in the Surfside area of Seal Beach , the agency reported . The first of the dead mammals washed ashore at Huntington Beach on Jan. 21 , and one or more new bodies have drifted ashore virtually every day since then , said Joe Cordaro , a wildlife biologist with the National Marine Fisheries Service office in Los Angeles . Before Wednesday , all of the dead animals were found at Huntington Beach . Some marine mammal experts recalled other sea lion beachings in recent years but noted that they had come to shore alive . `` We still do n't know what is killing them or where at sea they are dying , '' Cordaro said . He added that he does not think sharks have caused any of the deaths . `` If the sea lions had been attacked by sharks , you 'd see whole sections torn from their bodies , and we have n't seen this . '' he said . Cordaro said the sea lion found at Huntington Beach on Wednesday washed ashore about half a mile south of the Huntington Beach Pier . `` This was a sea lion 1 to 2 years old , '' he said . `` Most of the head was missing . It was a very decomposed body . '' A 4-foot-long , 50-pound sea lion found Tuesday at Huntington Beach had been dead at least three weeks . A sick sea lion was found at Sunset Beach on Saturday , but Cordaro said he did not believe that beaching was related to the other deaths . That animal died of kidney and liver failure Sunday at Sea World in San Diego . A Sea World spokesman estimated that the animal was more than 20 years old and described its condition as `` typical of an old sea lion ready to die . '' Some beach-goers have reported seeing what they thought were bullet wounds on several of the carcasses , but Cordaro said sea birds could have made the holes . Several headless sea lions have been found , leading some environmentalists to speculate that fishermen had cut the heads off while freeing the mammals from nets . But Cordaro said the heads may separate from the decomposing bodies in the surf . Sea lions are protected under the 1972 Marine Mammal Protection Act . Fishermen are allowed to kill them when they endanger their catch , said James Lecky , chief of the protected species program at the National Marine Fisheries Service . About 2,600 sea lions die each year from `` interaction with fishermen '' -- sometimes shot , sometimes tangled in their nets , Cordaro said . Still , sea lions are thriving from San Diego to British Columbia . Their population is estimated at 87,000 , double that of 10 years ago and growing by 5,700 a year . Sea lions were nearly extinct at the turn of the century because of commercial hunting . The animals are so plentiful now that fishermen regard them as pests . But Nello Castagnola , president of the California Gillnetters Assn. , which represents 100 commercial fishermen , said he doubts that a fisherman would cut off a sea lion 's head to free it from a net .