I take serious objection to the Op-Ed article by Paul Craig Roberts ( Aug. 15 ) which attacks Stanford University . I am a graduate of Stanford ( undergraduate economics ) , and a member of the Board of Overseers of the Hoover Institution . I am a life-long Republican . Having served as a Hoover overseer for four years , I would characterize the mood of our board as extremely hopeful and positive , looking forward while acknowledging that serious errors of tact and judgment have been committed by both Hoover and Stanford in recent years . ( Hoover Director ) Glenn Campbell will always be a hero at Hoover . It is also in keeping with the philosophy of those other great members of the Stanford family , John Gardner and Ernie Arbuckle , to acknowledge that periodic change is healthy , both institutionally and individually . With respect to the Reagan Library , it was accepted unanimously by the Stanford trustees . While there was considerable debate , the faculty senate did not turn down the Reagan Library . I would suggest that Glenn Campbell 's heroic impatience had as much to do with its demise at Stanford as any other single entity . Labeling the Stanford faculty leftist -- `` there was no place for moderates or reason . . . . either you hated America or were a war criminal '' -- is more revealing of the character of Paul Craig Roberts than of the Stanford faculty . Michael Boskin , Hoover Fellow , senior faculty in economics and currently chairman of President Bush 's Council of Economic Advisors , as well as David Brady , Hoover Fellow , senior faculty in political science and Stanford Business School , are but two examples of the caliber of faculty slurred by Roberts ' comments . Roberts goes on to criticize Stanford 's budgeting process . Deficits are planned for in the current university budget in order to absorb the extraordinary expense of raising $ 1.1 billion in the Centennial Campaign without curtailing the ongoing educational and research programs . As to the Centennial Campaign , Roberts asserts , `` Stanford 's fund-raising efforts were running behind the weak performance of last year . '' Last year 's `` weak performance , '' $ 181.9 million , was No . 1 among private universities in the United States and well ahead of Harvard for first place nationally . It was the first billion-dollar campaign ever announced by a university . It has survived the stock market crash , higher capital gains rates and even Paul Craig Roberts . Hoover and Stanford are two institutions which have contributed greatly to the West and to the world at large . They will each contribute greatly in the future , and they are worthy of our support . What such worthy institutions need and deserve are individuals who are willing to live with their imperfections and work to make them better . Roberts ' laundry list of hackneyed , provocative and unproven charges represents hide-bound negative conservatism at its worst . BOWEN H. ( BUZZ ) MC COY Los Angeles