On the day in June that Sherry Scott of Mission Viejo got her breast cancer diagnosis , she telephoned Kate , her friend in Texas . `` Her very first response was that there was a person she wanted me to see , '' Scott said . The person was Jan Fisher , a former intensive-care unit nurse who operates a private `` healing practice '' in Laguna Niguel , in which she uses crystal healing , channeling and meditation . Although large segments of the public sneer at such things as the alleged healing power of crystals , Scott has become convinced that Fisher has done wonders for her mind and body . `` Nobody can tell me it 's woo-woo because it 's not , '' Scott said . As a result , Scott , 52 and a self-described `` old Iowa conservative , '' has joined the ranks of the so-called New Age , a movement rooted in Eastern theology but cross-fertilized by philosophy , psychology and the arts . `` Have you ever had intuition where you know something to be true ? '' Scott said . `` This was the feeling I had . I had talked to my friend about Jan , but I never had a personal need to go talk to her . `` So I took a week to think about it . The more I thought about it , the more I thought ( her cancer ) is happening for a reason . `` I said , ' I 'm an intelligent person . I 'm going to go and talk to her and see what 's going on . ' `` In the not-too-distant past , New Age was most often associated with the occult , conjuring up notions of swamis , Gypsies and crystal balls . Now -- with actress Shirley MacLaine publishing books about past lives and inspiring a network TV miniseries , with Nancy Reagan revealing her interest in astrology , with National Public Radio broadcasting a Christmas story about a wizard searching for a magic crystal and with the music industry offering Grammys for New Age music -- the movement 's credibility appears to be rising . Because the movement has no formal organization or household names as its leaders , charting its public popularity is difficult . But while Los Angeles dominates the New Age scene in Southern California , Orange County people can also find an ample menu of New Age items to sample . For example , they can go to any of a dozen or more bookstores from Yorba Linda to Costa Mesa , to a church in Irvine , to a channeling class in Newport Beach or to a past-life workshop in Huntington Beach . Orange County Resources , a trimonthly Huntington Beach publication that has tripled its number of pages in 5 years , lists dozens of New Age events or seminars . The 160-page Southern California New Age telephone book lists nearly 240 categories of products or services . The National New Age Yellow Pages is published in Fullerton and identifies itself as `` the complete directory of consciousness-raising services , products and organizations . '' But not all the New Age vibrations in the county are good . Linda McNamar is the assistant minister at the Church of Religious Science in Huntington Beach , which claims a 3,000-member congregation . `` I was comfortable calling myself a New Age person years ago , and I 'm not comfortable calling myself a New Age person now because of the misunderstanding that might occur in some people 's thinking about what I believe and how I live my life , '' she said . For example , the church does not believe in putting power in outside forces , such as crystals or channels , in which people act as conduits for others to unseen spiritual contacts . Like McNamar , others have edged away from linking themselves completely to New Age thought . The Helix Center in El Toro is often mentioned by New Agers as one of the focal points of New Age activity in the county . In the last year , however , new executive director Leonard Cohn has shied away from overtly trumpeting the bookstore as a New Age center , although it identifies some of its materials as New Age . Instead , he identified the center as a `` creative education center and bookstore '' because , he said , under the previous management the center `` was never a financial success . They always ran a deficit . '' In addition , he said , the lectures , seminars and other programs offered to the public suffered from waning attendance . None of the more established New Age merchants described Orange County as a hotbed of activity , but many believe that the public 's willingness to consider New Age practices is growing . Marcia Ingenito is editor and publisher of the National New Age Yellow Pages , a 250-page combination of telephone directory and New Age resource book . `` Orange County tends to be very conservative , and New Age was underground for a very , very long time , '' she said . `` What makes it quite a wonderful place to be if you 're interested in New Age is that people are coming out of the woodwork because they 're no longer afraid of being criticized , they recognize their own strength and they believe in what they 're doing . '' Ingenito said that most of the New Age merchants now advertising have been around for 10 years or more but that stereotypes of the movement -- that it is satanic or cultish -- kept retailers from seeking mainstream recognition . In its most encompassing terms , the New Age movement is a continuation of the `` consciousness-raising '' that surfaced in the 1960s . It is as old as Eastern religions and as new as the pop-psyche trends of the 1960s and '70s . Devotees tend to believe that there are vast untapped resources of energy and awareness within the human mind that , if pursued , can lead to personal betterment . It butts heads with Western religion , because most New Agers believe that traditional Judeo-Christian theology is but one source of a person 's search for truth . But not all New Age exponents subscribe to all the movement 's practices , with many of the most committed believers warning about false prophets in the New Age camp . It is a largely laissez faire movement , probably because it is so diverse and personalized in its approach . It does n't have the fervor of organized religions , because there is no credo . Indeed , it incorporates ideas as mundane as meditation and vegetarianism to things as other-worldly as belief in past-life experiences and reincarnation , channeling ( getting in touch with mystic spirit guides ) and personal energy fields . Many aspects seem little more than harmless oddities and have entered the mainstream consciousness , as evidenced by the selling of crystals at major department stores or greeting card shops . But with so many seemingly harmless oddities to it , the New Age movement has stirred some fervent opposition . Robert Burrows is editor of the Spiritual Counterfeits Project newsletter , published by a Berkeley-based organization that opposes the New Age movement because of its conflicts with traditional Judeo-Christian religion . He said New Age `` used to be assigned to the fringe part of society , but the interesting development now with New Age is that it no longer is on the fringe ; it 's really mainstream . '' Despite the seemingly harmless aspects that might accompany New Age thought , it is basically a spiritual movement , Burrows said : `` It speaks to the profound alienation that people experience in this culture , but it does nothing to relieve it . It actually exaggerates it and gives it religious justification . '' As such , New Age may not seem as threatening to mainstream America as have other spiritual-based movements . Indeed , New Age music , unlike the head-banging that traditionalists have come to associate with the `` latest sound , '' is in fact a dreamy , instrumental style that some find soothing and others find narcoleptic . New Agers , Burrows said , believe that `` humanity shares divineness with a deified creation . Humanity has all the wisdom and power of the deity . The basic appeal is power . That 's a particularly reassuring message in a society where people feel profoundly impotent . '' Writing in `` Equipping the Saints , '' an evangelical Christian magazine published in Anaheim , author Douglas Groothuis describes the New Age movement as a `` smorgasbord of spiritual substitutes for Christianity , all heralding our unlimited potential to transform ourselves and the planet so that a 'New Age ' of peace , light and love will break forth . '' Groothuis encouraged practicing Christians to `` pray for New Agers and against the New Age movement . '' New Agers tend to be more passive toward Christians . That 's because they view Christ 's teachings as but one source of information , but not one to debase . But most concurred with the view that New Age offers a refuge for those unsatisfied with traditional religions . Caren Croxen has a marriage and family counseling practice in Fountain Valley and is a New Age exponent . She will apply her New Age beliefs if people ask her about it . `` I think we 've gone well beyond a particular sector , like hippies , being interested in it , '' she said . `` I notice in my everyday counseling , I work with some very straight people . They 'll talk about the power of the mind to keep us well or happy . They 'll talk about having lived before and reincarnation and that they expect to live again . These are topics people never brought up before in regular sessions . '' Betty Easley , activities coordinator of the Psynetics Foundation in Anaheim -- which offers a wide range of New Age activities and programs -- said New Age thinking is less stigmatic today because more and more people have experienced such things as psychic phenomena . The foundation opened in 1962 as a lecture group . `` New Age thinking is more accepted now because it 's come out of the back rooms , '' Easley said . `` Only those who are very narrow-minded would call it the work of the devil . '' Other New Agers are more dubious about how widespread the movement has become . Brian Enright , who publishes Orange County Resources from his Huntington Beach apartment , said he thinks the people who were attracted to the consciousness-raising movements of the 1960s are `` the workhorses of the New Age . '' `` Last year , when Shirley MacLaine came out , a lot of people jumped on the bandwagon , '' he said . `` Crystals and channeling , it was really fascinating . There are still people on that level , fascinated by the more dramatic aspects rather than seeing any vehicle for personal and planetary transformation . I started to wince a little about the term New Age because it came to mean so many fringy things . So there is a media New Age , and there are people deeply and genuinely committed to planetary transformation . '' Despite the pizazz of things such as channeling , Enright said his publication 's most successful issue was devoted to vegetarianism . He began his magazine in 1984 , and it has peaked at 40,000 copies , distributed free at various outlets . New Age thinking `` is more mainstream but not to a large degree , '' Enright said . `` You can get away with wearing crystals , but if you tell someone at work you 're going to a channeling , they look at you strangely . If you tell someone you 're going to an Indian sweat lodge , they might say , 'Hey , is n't that great , ' but when you leave , they 're going to say , 'That 's weird . ' `` That does not make the movement 's intrusion into the public 's consciousness any less troubling to its opponents . Kevin Springer , editor of the evangelical Christian magazine Equipping the Saints , said he was eating lunch one day when a woman sat down next to him and began talking about the Harmonic Convergence in August , 1987 , which many considered a seminal moment in the New Age . `` I realized then it was fairly pervasive , '' Springer said . `` The problem is that , to the people who are in this , it is n't a joke to them . It 's very serious . It 's life and death . I have to admit that I used to just laugh it off , slough it off , but when we put this issue of the magazine together ( the fall , 1988 , issue devoted to the New Age movement ) , we realized this is a comprehensive world view they have , and it needs to be taken seriously . `` We live in a society that is so influenced by materialism and rationalism and individualism , that people are looking for something new . They 've rejected traditional Christianity , but now they have the feeling that there has to be more than just one thing . They 're not just satisfied with what 's left . This irrational kind of involvement , whether it 's channeling or reincarnation , gives a release to people , and they 're really jumping into it . '' Springer said while `` some Christians are hysterical '' about New Age , he thinks that is overreaction : `` I do n't perceive it as being a threat to Christianity . I perceive it as being wrongheaded and a dangerous way of thinking about life and one 's self . '' Even among supporters of the broader New Age philosophies , rifts have developed . Cohn , a retired home builder who took over the Helix Center , said he has `` some philosophical differences with New Age . '' They center on his belief that the answers to people 's anxieties are found within , rather than from such outside sources as a channel . `` Here in Orange County , with our conservative population , New Age is of interest to a small percentage of the population , '' Cohn said . New Age , he said , represents another avenue `` for people to find comfort in their lives and ( for people ) who have been turned off by the traditional religions and , to a little extent , by the totally scientific , pragmatic viewpoint and are looking to embrace or explore alternatives in terms of spirituality and healing . '' New Age appeals to them , he said , `` because it promises a connection to a higher self . '' However , he said , many people became disillusioned with the movement because it promised things it could not deliver . Even the strongest New Age devotees caution novices to be wary of those offering New Age programs . `` There can be some people who are sincere and others who are fools , '' according to Easley of the Psynetics Foundation . `` They think they 're tapping into other dimensions . Some are and some are n't . '' Skeptical talk does little to deter die-hard New Agers , who believe that the move toward an enlightened state is a slow evolutionary process . Their confidence is such that Rochelle Muro has opened a New Age bookstore in Yorba Linda -- one of the county 's most conservative areas . `` We needed one here , '' Muro said . `` Someone had to do it . I know ( a large New Age clientele ) is not here in north Orange County . It will grow in 2 or 3 years . It will take a year for the shock of moving in to wear off . '' But asked about the commercial perils of her venture , she said there is more to her effort than that : `` My purpose is to teach , to educate . '' As for Scott of Mission Viejo , she has had no recurrence of cancer in the few months since her mastectomy and is continuing to look at her condition from a New Age point of view .