Assembly candidate Rob Wilcox , who pledged two months ago not to take campaign contributions from insurance companies , has received $ 1,900 this year from insurance agents , a Van Nuys insurance brokerage firm and the owner of a Woodland Hills insurance agency , campaign records show . Wilcox made the promise in a code of ethics he urged four other Republicans to sign in their race to succeed retiring Assemblywoman Marian La Follette ( R-Northridge ) in the 38th Assembly District . In a March 29 letter , Wilcox called on the other candidates to refuse to accept insurance contributions `` until the insurance crisis is solved . '' `` The insurance crisis has gone unsolved because the Legislature has been beholden to those special interests . . . . It is time for those candidates who believe in returning ethics in public service to join me in this major step for ethics and integrity , '' he wrote . Wilcox , a La Follette aide who has her endorsement , defended his acceptance of the contributions , saying they came from individual insurance agents , not large insurance companies such as State Farm or Allstate . `` I do n't think that local agents in the San Fernando Valley qualify as insurance companies . . . . These are by no means insurance companies and certainly not what I was referring to in my pledge , '' he said . But Wilcox 's GOP competitors were quick to attack him Friday for accepting the donations . `` I think it 's a little hypocritical of him to conduct himself as he has , '' attorney Bob Scott said . `` He challenged everyone else not to accept insurance contributions , and he has , as far as I can see , ended up breaking his vow . I guess he felt it was OK to change horses in the middle of the stream . . . . '' Real estate broker Paula Boland said the insurance money `` shows to me a lack of integrity . '' Wilcox and Boland are considered the front-runners to win the 38th Assembly District seat , which La Follette has held for 10 years . The district stretches across the northern Valley from Hidden Hills in the west to La Crescenta in the east . Two Democrats , Irene Allert and Gary Crandall , are competing for their party 's nomination . But Republicans outnumber Democrats in the district 86,000 to 74,000 , and the GOP nominee is favored to win the November general election . In a state-mandated campaign finance report filed last month , Wilcox listed five contributions totaling $ 1,900 from donors engaged in insurance sales . The contributions were : $ 250 from Advanced Insurance Managers of Van Nuys ; $ 500 from Joseph G. Havlick , a Granada Hills insurance executive ; $ 550 from William H. Hawkins , a Sacramento-based agent for Connecticut Mutual Alliance , which sells life insurance ; $ 100 from Northridge insurance agent Jeffrey A. Thomas ; and $ 500 from Kenneth D. Ulis , owner of a Woodland Hills insurance agency . Scott said he refused to pledge not to take insurance money because he believed insurance interests should n't be singled out and banned from contributing to political campaigns . Boland said she is `` proud to have the support '' of insurance agents and companies . Wilcox identified Advanced Insurance Managers as a brokerage firm . He said that Hawkins , the Sacramento insurance agent , is a longtime friend and former chairman of La Follette 's campaign fund-raising organization , the `` 38 Club . '' Wilcox said his opponents are attacking him because , with only three days left before the June 5 primary election , he is in the lead . He said that Boland , a longtime chamber of commerce activist , `` should know the difference between small-business people and big insurance companies . ''