HERE 'S A big scoop coming from Esquire in its February issue . The magazine that once used to be `` for men '' but now is for all the sexes , has put fiction on its cover for the first time in 10 years . Editor Lee Eisenberg is crowing over a new short novel by Philip Roth , titled `` Deception . '' They do say behind the scenes that there 'll be lots of guessing as to the identities of the protagonists -- a man and his mistress in a London hotel room . The man is called Philip , as a matter of fact . Roth himself , who lives in New York with actress Claire Bloom , did not like it that Esquire speculates somewhat mildly in the magazine 's introduction of his book as to who the real-life subjects might be . Philip Roth , that very autobiographical author , says fiction is fiction . PEOPLE ARE talking about the TV Hall of Fame taping festivities which will appear on the Fox network come Jan. 24 . Here was an evening of honors and fun and the biggest names in Hollywood . Things were sailing along with the top peers of the entertainment realm having a ball . It was a dream until Milton Berle appeared to introduce honors for Perry Como . Milton could n't read the teleprompter and his moments stretched out into unbearable minutes . Finally , he introduced Frank Sinatra , who came on sounding as if he had swallowed a shot glass . Sinatra could n't read the teleprompter either and this again elongated the segments . Backstage , Fox 's Barry Diller was pacing frantically and the producers -- Dwight Hemion and Gary Smith -- were having kittens . Finally , Como arrived to save the day . But he could n't read the teleprompter either and proceeded to drone on for what seemed like ages , reading lists of the names of everybody who had ever helped him since 1929 . It will be fascinating to see how Fox edits this portion of the dazzling evening for the TV audience . PEOPLE ARE ALSO talking about `` Miss Manners , '' aka Judith Martin , and her devastating New York Times review of the new Michael Thomas novel about Wall Street , `` Hanover House . '' Judith came right out and said it was an anti-Semitic book . Fortunately , author Thomas has his own saucy Observer column in which to defend himself and he equates his famous reviewer , the etiquette queen , with having WASP values that would do justice to Edith Wharton while being a rather super-sensitive Jewish person herself . Oh , my -- another feud . Meanwhile , read `` Hanover House '' with its whopping great cast of characters and its financial sturm und drang over the decades and decide for yourself . PAULETTE GODDARD , one of the most adorable of all `` The Women '' ever to come down the movie pike , has sold her famous Diego Rivera portrait , done in Mexico in the early '40s , and she received $ 220,000 for it . This leads some to speculate that the 87-year-old Miss G is `` broke . '' But I 'll bet she has diamond bracelets she has n't even worn yet . CONGRATULATIONS to Good Housekeeping 's John Mack Carter , a veteran editor who still looks the way he did many years ago and operates at the usual high speed . He was given the prestigious Henry Johnson Fisher Award by the Magazine Publishers of America .