A massive oil spill that forced the closing of an Alaskan port has California oil refiners bracing themselves for possible shortages of crude oil if shipments do not resume quickly , say company officials . `` If it stays closed for a couple of days it would disrupt supplies , '' said Chevron spokesman Mike Libbey . `` Several days of that and you will start seeing gasoline shortages on the street . '' `` We do n't anticipate any impact assuming that the port opens for tanker traffic shortly , '' said Arco spokesman Al Greenstein . If Valdez remains closed , however , `` that 's a whole different ball game , '' he said . The shutdown of the port of Valdez , closed since late last week , has drawn attention to how dependent California has become on Alaskan crude oil . California refineries rely on the state 's own reserves for about 60 % of their supply of crude oil -- Alaska accounts for nearly all of the remaining 40 % . About one out of three cars in California runs on gasoline refined from Alaska 's North Slope crude , according to Arco . `` There is a very delicate balance of supply and demand , '' Steve Shelton , president of the Southern California Service Station Assn . `` It does n't take much to knock it out of whack . '' The California Energy Commission estimates that 20 million to 30 million barrels of Alaskan oil are in transit to the state refineries , which have another 20 million barrels in stock . Chevron refineries along the West Coast , including those in El Segundo and Richmond , Calif. , would gradually begin to cut back production if Valdez remains shut down today , Libbey said . Industry officials say Arco , the state 's largest gasoline retailer , is in a particularly tight spot since the recent temporary closure of a refinery in Cherry Point , Wash. , for maintenance has left it with a smaller reserve than normal . Arco estimates that its refinery in Cherry Point and one in El Segundo have about a week 's supply of crude on hand . Arco has four tankers waiting outside of Valdez , said Greenstein , who also said the company might be able to tap into a tanker loaded with a shipment of oil owned by Standard Oil of Ohio . Arco said the U.S. Coast Guard is expected to open Valdez today on a limited basis . Tankers will be allowed to enter and exit one at a time , Arco says . Despite Arco 's expectations , industry officials said delivery schedules have already been interrupted . It takes tankers about 24 hours to be filled at Valdez and another six days to reach California ports , say industry officials . Chevron said a tanker scheduled to arrive next week was still waiting outside of Valdez Monday and will probably be late . However , a Chevron tanker that departed just before the port closed was expected to have unloaded in Richmond early this morning . California , which consumes about 2 million barrels of oil daily , is relatively isolated from other domestic sources of crude oil . Only two oil pipelines connect California with the rest of the nation and those pipes are designed to transport oil out of the state . The lack of domestic connections might force California to turn to more expensive sources of foreign oil if Valdez remains closed , say industry analysts . Currently , foreign imports -- mostly from Indonesia -- make up only 5 % of the state 's supply of crude oil , according to state figures . `` The West Coast is essentially an energy island separated from the rest of the country , '' said one industry official . `` We have plenty of oil with supplies from Alaska , but without it , that 's when we have a problem . '' * Nearly 40 % of all crude oil refined in California comes from Alaska 's North Slope . * Nearly one of every three cars on California highways operates on gasoline refined from Alaskan oil . RELATED STORIES : Part I