San Diegans develop cancers at rates comparable to elsewhere in the United States , according to local researchers who are monitoring new cancer cases reported to health officials . The cancer incidence rates were tabulated by the San Diego and Imperial Organization for Cancer Control , a state-funded organization that began collecting cancer data in California 's two southernmost counties Jan. 1 , 1988 . The state-funded cancer registry is one of 10 systems being formed to track cancer statewide , said UC San Diego pathology professor Sidney L. Saltzstein , the organizations 's director . Data released during a Thursday press conference provided a `` snapshot '' of the types and incidence of cancer among San Diegans during 1988 , Saltzstein said . The types and numbers of cancers reported during 1988 were `` well within the realm of the usual numbers '' generated by previous surveys elsewhere in the country , Saltzstein said . According to SANDIOCC 's preliminary data , 6,361 new cases of cancer were reported in San Diego during 1988 , and 189 cases were reported in Imperial County . A complete report will be issued in about four months , Saltzstein said . According to the registry , the leading types of cancers reported in San Diego County in 1988 were genital , 1,475 cases ; digestive-tract , 1,222 ; breast , 1,051 , and lung , 966 . Although the study 's first-year results will help researchers learn more about cancer in San Diego , the `` true value '' of the registry will become evident with `` the accumulation of data over many years , '' Saltzstein said . Armed with data from several years , researchers will be better equipped to determine whether suspected cancer clusters are linked to environmental causes , Saltzstein said . Researchers now must rely on incidental data that often is incomplete , Saltzstein said . Researchers will also use the new registry to try to better understand why various populations are more susceptible to certain types of cancer . And , researchers will be able to track the long-term progress of individual cancer cases , Saltzstein said . Although the registry will generate data about the incidence and type of cancer in San Diego , its reporting mechanism is designed to protect the confidentiality of individual cancer patients , Saltzstein said . SANDIOCC wo n't identify cancer victims or the doctors and hospitals that provide treatment . The registry will release geographical data about where the cancers develop . Researchers will use that data to learn whether suspected clusters of cancers are linked to environmental causes , said Cedric Garland , an associate professor of family medicine at UCSD . For example , Garland believes data could help settle the debate about whether electric transmission lines generate electromagnetic fields that cause cancers . Researchers could plot the exact incidence of cancers in a given area and `` superimpose a map of the power lines to see if there is a relationship , '' Garland said Thursday . Data from the registry 's first year is `` valuable , but ( the project ) will get more valuable with each year 's additions , '' Garland said . `` This is a leap ahead '' for researchers , Garland said . Nearly 40 researchers already have submitted data requests to SANDIOCC , according to SANDIOCC program manager Joe Raffa . Before the SANDIOCC project , most data about the incidence and type of cancer in San Diego was drawn from a statewide project that , since the 1940s , has surveyed 10 % of Californians who developed cancer . That data , while accurate , did not give researchers enough information to focus on individual populations or specific geographic areas , Saltzstein said . Interest in cancer registries is growing , Raffa said . Nearly 40 states are creating registries or have passed legislation enabling the creation of registries . `` The thought is that we 'd eventually have a national registry , '' Saltzstein said . `` This is the obvious way to start . '' The state-financed cancer registry is modeled after an Orange County one , which began in 1980 . State legislators approved funding for a statewide system of registries in 1985 , Saltzstein said .