First anniversary . First major league game . First start . At first base , naturally . First base hit in his first at-bat . First run batted in . Lee Stevens just hopes it wo n't be the last . Stevens and his wife , Kim , went out for dinner Sunday night , in celebration of their wedding one year ago . When they returned to the Portland hotel where the Angels ' triple-A Edmonton team was staying , they got good news -- `` a present , '' Stevens said . He had been called to Anaheim to replace Wally Joyner , who Monday was placed on the 15-day disabled list with a possible stress fracture of the right knee . Stevens made his major league debut Monday night in the Angels ' 3-1 loss to Milwaukee at Anaheim Stadium , and he made a lasting impression . He went three for four with a double and an RBI . He played first base admirably , though he spent much of his time playing the outfield for Edmonton , where he was batting .293 with 16 home runs and 31 doubles . Stevens , a first-round draft choice in 1986 , distinguished himself at the plate and in the field , in particular making a leaping , back-handed snag of a sharp liner over the bag by Dave Parker . But for all his success , Stevens found himself in a position to disappoint , as well . Stevens was tagged out at the plate in the sixth inning as he tried to score from second on Donnie Hill 's single to left . B.J . Surhoff , the Brewers ' catcher , blocked the plate well and the play was more Surhoff 's success than Stevens ' failure . Stevens ' final at-bat came with two out in the eighth inning , with runners on first and second and the Angels trailing , 3-1 . The Brewers brought on left-hander Dan Plesac to face Stevens , a left-handed hitter . The move worked . Stevens struck out , swinging big . After getting the word Sunday , Lee and Kim spent the first couple hours on the phone to parents and friends . They arrived in Anaheim around 1:30 in the afternoon , and when he arrived at Anaheim Stadium , Stevens learned he would start , even though all his equipment had not yet arrived . Joyner , on the disabled list for the first time in his five-season major league career , lent his glove . `` I think I 'm still in shock , '' Stevens said after batting practice . `` Obviously , I 'm happy . I was very excited . I could n't wait to get here . I 'm just going to try to stay on an even keel . '' In his first at-bat , Stevens worked the count full against Brewer starter Ron Robinson and then lined a single to right . The souvenir ball was hustled into the Angel dugout , where pitcher Bert Blyleven , the team prankster , spent a very long time inscribing it . He was still at it when Stevens got another first -- first time caught stealing . The next time Stevens came up , the game was still scoreless in the fourth inning . The Angels had runners on first and third after singles by Dave Winfield and Lance Parrish . Stevens drove in the game 's first run with his second single of the night . Later , with the score tied , 1-1 , in the sixth inning , he nearly scored the go-ahead run . With two out , Stevens doubled off the wall in center . Hill singled , and Stevens tried to score . Surhoff tried to stop him , and did . The Angels have found themselves in a pinch recently , with Joyner missing the last four games . Bill Schroeder , their backup catcher , spelled Joyner the first day . On the second , Hill added first base to his list of positions played , which covers every infield spot but catcher . Rick Schu filled in on the third day , and Hill again on the fourth .