A dozen years . Time enough for a toddler to become a teen-ager , for a fledgling scientist to become a veteran , for arcane technologies to become everyday . Time enough for an 1,800-pound package of primitive electronics to skate more than 4 billion miles toward the stars . And time enough for the 300 people who remain part of the Voyager 2 team to take stock of memories built up over years of planning , engineering and executing their grand tour of four planets . Especially for the estimated 10 to 20 scientists and engineers who have been around since the very beginning , the tour 's finale at Neptune this week is a time of bittersweet recollection . Stewart ( Andy ) Collins , 42 , is one of those whose careers was built on Voyager ; in 1970 he came to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory as a 23-year-old , straight out of college , and then joined the Voyager planning team shortly after the program began in 1972 . He has since moved on to supervise JPL 's development of light detection equipment for other space missions . Collins remembers that his son , Brian , now 12 , said one of his first words in 1979 when Voyager flew by the solar system 's largest planet : `` Jupiper . '' `` He 's our launch boy , '' Collins said , explaining that Brian was born a few months before Voyager 's launch in August , 1977 . `` And our daughter , we think of her as Encounter plus 20 days , because she was born 20 days after the second Jupiter flyby . And our latest is Encounter minus 17 days . '' Marie Collins was born Aug. 7 , as the laboratory in Pasadena geared up for Voyager 2 's pass by Neptune . That close encounter will come at 8:56 p.m. tonight , when Voyager will fly just 3,000 miles from Neptune 's swirling clouds . Although the Neptune mission will not be considered finished until Oct. 2 , the close approach marks the beginning of the end of a program that has changed not just astronomy textbooks but also the lives of those who have been dedicated to it . Their days , they say , will always carry reminders of Voyager . `` Voyager has spoiled me for anything else , '' Collins said . `` I 'm reconciled to the fact that whatever comes next probably wo n't be nearly as satisfying . '' The Voyager experience has also shaped the life of Christopher P. Jones , section manager for guidance and control systems at JPL . He joined Voyager in 1973 , one year after the program officially began . All the years of planning for every conceivable disaster in Voyager 's clunky computers -- something he now does for all JPL missions -- changed his personality , Jones said with a grin . `` I always have contingency plans . I 'm always thinking ahead , and never optimistically , '' Jones said . He checks to see if there is air in the spare tire . He builds time into his schedule so he will not be late . He knows which route he will take if the freeway off-ramp is closed . `` It comes across as a pessimistic view of life , but in fact it 's more insurance than anything else , '' he said . Jones and his colleagues had to imagine every improbable glitch along the 4.4-billion-mile journey to Neptune , equipping Voyager 's six computers both for frontier science and to correct problems as they developed . But they only had 28,000 bytes of computer memory to do it with -- 35 times less than the memory of Jones ' desktop computer of today . Indeed , now that scientists can stop worrying about nursing the aging spacecraft past another planet , they can sit back and laugh affectionately at its outdated technology . When Voyager 1 and 2 flew by Jupiter in 1979 , the days before George Lucas-style supercomputer graphics , the Voyager team used laborious techniques to make a motion picture of the rotating gases and famous red spot , Collins recalled . Several dozen images taken in sequence were processed individually at JPL , with extra care taken so they would all be in the same scale . The images were given to a film recorder to be converted into large transparencies . These then were trundled off to a Hollywood animation house , where they were sequenced onto film -- `` like Disney would do , '' Collins said . `` VCRs were n't what they are today . Back then , if you did n't have 16-millimeter film , nobody would know how to show it , '' Collins said . `` Today , you 'd do the processing , record the images right onto a videodisc and play them onto videotape . '' Instant movie . Voyager 's television cameras , called vidicons , also find it hard to get respect . Although they were the state of the art in the late 1960s , their light sensitivity is many times less than that of the silicon-chip-based cameras that have since become standard fare of home videotapers , noted Bradford A. Smith of the University of Arizona , leader of the imaging team since 1972 . `` You just could n't even compare the two , '' Smith said . `` Vidicons are just the last thing in the world that anyone would want to fly . '' For Linda Horn , infrared experiment specialist for Voyager , the mission opened up a magical world that she had dreamed about since childhood . `` I had a little telescope when I was a girl , and I used to look at the planets and the stars , '' said Horn , who joined the Voyager team shortly before the 1977 launch . `` To actually come to JPL , get on a space mission and then go to the launch -- talk about enthusiastic . '' She and others involved with Voyager emphasize the team nature of the project , the kind of effort that makes lifelong friends . Said Collins : `` It was always staffed with just enough people . By that I mean everyone had to do his job well , because there was n't a second person there to do it for them . So you develop a lot of good relationships with your co-workers . '' This sense of the end of something unique and wondrous is common among these interplanetary pioneers . `` We 're not going to go back to Neptune in our lifetimes , '' Jones said . `` To be able to participate in an enterprise like Voyager is a special , one-time chance . It 's like being around when Columbus discovered America . '' Smith said he remains convinced that Voyager is scientifically the most productive , most exciting space mission ever . `` Just look at Neptune , '' Smith said . `` The whole system is so photogenic and so exciting . You 've got the atmosphere which is much more active than what we had ever expected it to be . There are dynamics there that we do n't understand . `` That 's what makes missions exciting . If you immediately understand what you 're looking at , that 's no fun . It 's when you see things that just leave you lying awake at night thinking about them , and then you eventually figure out what it 's all about -- that 's the fun part of it . '' Charley Kohlhase , mission design manager and a primary mover in Voyager since the early days , is spending this week careening from scientific meeting to press briefing to official reception , trying not to look too rumpled for the TV cameras . One morning early in the week , he paused briefly to talk about both the excitement and the sadness he is feeling . `` It 's just exhilarating now . The problem will come next Monday or Tuesday , '' Kohlhase said . `` The press will pick up and leave , all the trailers will go . We 'll look at Neptune and it 'll be shrinking smaller and smaller in the pictures , and even only barely be seen as a small crescent . And we 'll know that the last big picture show is ended . '' His comfort comes not from looking forward to other space missions , but from turning homeward . `` I have a grandson only a year and a half old , and I love to go hiking in the Sierra , '' he said . `` Ten or 12 years from now I 'll be hiking , and some night after the sun 's down and the stars are up and I 'm telling him stories , I 'm going to look up and see Sirius . '' Voyager will be headed toward Sirius , the brightest star in the heavens , after it leaves our solar system . `` And I 'll reflect back and tell him stories that he can share and pass on to the generations , '' Kohlhase said , `` and I guess amaze him a little bit . '' SHOW-STOPPING MOON -- An obscure moon threatened to steal Neptune 's thunder as Voyager raced toward the distant planet . Page 37