This month -- weeks after most magazines have shrunk to normal size following the end of the heavy Christmas advertising season -- many black-oriented publications such as Ebony , Essence and Black Enterprise are fat with ads , thanks to the designation of February as Black History Month . In an effort to garner good will from the nation 's black consumers who spend an estimated $ 240 billion annually , many of the country 's biggest advertisers -- including Anheuser-Busch Inc. , AT & T , Burger King , Miller Brewing Co. , Eastern Airlines , McDonalds and Coca-Cola -- have taken out full-page ads in black magazines and newspapers touting the achievements of black historical figures and celebrating black history month . `` The February issues of most magazines tend to be thin issues after the heavy spending from September through December , '' explained Clarence O. Smith , president of Essence Communications Inc. , publisher of the black women 's magazine Essence . `` If it were not for Black History Month , we , as well as other black publications , would do a lot less well in February . '' The February issue of Ebony contains at least 10 % more advertising than the December issue and is the largest behind the special August issue of Ebony , said Dennis Boston , vice president of advertising . The February Black Enterprise , with 244 pages , was more than twice the size of the 100-page December issue . Although the special advertising efforts have boosted the economic fortunes of many black advertising agencies and black publications , some black historians complain that the educational value of the campaigns may be suspect . `` The possibility exists for exploitation . . . because these companies are engaged in business to make money , '' said Karen A. Robinson , executive director of the Assn . for the Study of Afro-American Life and History , a Washington-based group that founded Black History Month . `` They are not historians . I think a better way for Black History Month to be celebrated would be for corporations to work with organizations like ours that have some expertise in the field . '' Black historical achievement has been publicly recognized each year since at least 1926 , when historian Carter G. Woodson started Negro History Week . But corporations did not embrace the observance as a marketing tool until they began hiring black advertising agencies in the 1970s , said Ken Smikle , editor and publisher of Target Market News , a Chicago-based trade publication that follows the black consumer market . Awards , Scholarships The trend gained momentum in 1986 , Smikle said , with the designation of Martin Luther King Jr. 's birthday as a federal holiday . As a result , he said , more and more of the $ 700 million advertisers spend annually to reach black consumers -- out of the $ 24 billion in total ad spending -- is showered on black publications between January and February . In addition , companies such as Miller , McDonalds and Coca-Cola spend millions more in promotions and sponsorships aimed at black consumers . Coke , for example , will award more than $ 130,000 in college scholarships through Coca-Cola 's `` Share the Dream '' scholarship sweepstakes that run in conjunction with Black History Month , said Charles Morrison , vice president of black and Hispanic consumer markets . While the advertisers emphasize that they market to black consumers throughout the year , they say they make special efforts during February in order to maintain awareness of their products as well as enhance their reputations as being sensitive to the black community . `` These ads are not intended to sell products , '' said Ivan Burwell , Coors national program manager . `` I simply see it as a recognition by Coors of the importance of the black consumer market . It certainly is an honest and sincere effort to recognize black achievement . '' However , historians complain that many ads avoid controversial political figures in black history . Although at least two recent ads mention Black Muslim Malcolm X , most highlight inventors or pre-colonization African royalty . An AT & T advertisement depicts inventor Lewis Latimer , for example . Similarly , an Eastern Airlines ad features African kings . Historian John Henrike Clarke , a professor emeritus of African History at Hunter College in New York who has written or edited 25 books on black history and served as a historical consultant to companies that do Black History Month advertising , says that while some of the ads expose Americans to information they might not otherwise be aware of , some of the efforts at black history are `` superficial . '' `` In general , these are not benevolent efforts ; they are mostly public relations , '' Clarke said . `` I 'm not saying they are evil in any way . Its just that they have their own self-interest , which is to sell more of their products and services . As a result , they cite the safe historical figures . They do n't cite . . . ones like Marcus Garvey because they do n't want to cause trouble . '' BLACK HISTORY MONTH Begun in 1926 as `` Negro History Week '' by historian Carter G. Woodson , Black History Month attempts to spotlight the influence of blacks on history . The seven-day tribute was expanded to all of February in 1976 . The observance is sponsored by the Assn . for the Study of Afro-American Life and History , a Washington-based group of about 200 historians founded by Woodson . The theme for this year 's observance is `` The Role of Afro-American Churches in Economic , Political and Social Development at Home and Abroad . ''