Several U.S. airlines , led by Continental , will raise some of their discount fares by as much as $ 80 round trip , indicating that travelers may be in for another general round of fare hikes . Continental said late Thursday that it will increase most of its discount fares by $ 20 to $ 80 a round trip in time for the heavy summer travel season . The increases , which were matched by Braniff , TWA and America West , apply to round-trip tickets with advance purchase requirements . The fare hikes take effect on reservations made after May 27 . Meanwhile , American , United , Delta , and USAir said they were studying Continental 's move but had not decided whether to increase their fares . If such major carriers do not go along with the increases , observers said , Continental and the others may be forced to roll as least some of them back to remain competitive . Vacation Travelers The increases will primarily affect vacation travelers who often book flights in advance . Continental , based in Houston , is not raising its unrestricted fares , used mostly by business travelers , `` at this time , '' a spokesman said . Continental said both its MaxSaver fares and its excursion fares were affected by the hikes . The MaxSavers require ticket purchases as much as two weeks in advance , a Saturday night stay and are non-refundable . The excursion fares , which cost more , require a seven-day advance purchase and carry a 25 % cancellation penalty . Continental is not raising its fares on the highly competitive Newark , N.J.-to-Washington route or on a number of routes where it competes with low-fare Southwest Airlines . Continental said it is raising ticket prices because there is a strong demand for air travel . `` The summer is the busiest period in the airline industry , and this adjustment is typical for this time of year , '' said Ned Walker , a Continental spokesman . Analysts said fare hikes in the airline industry are justified by increased fuel and labor costs . In addition , the analysts said , most airlines have placed large orders for expensive new aircraft . Another reason for the increase is that the strike at Eastern Airlines has idled that carrier 's fleet , increasing the demand for seats on other carriers , said William Whitlow Jr. , an airline industry analyst with the Dain Bosworth investment firm in Seattle . Air fares have been rising generally for several months . In January , most U.S. airlines , led by American , raised their excursion fares in 40 markets by $ 20 to $ 40 per round trip in response to unusually strong demand for air travel . Also in January , the airlines that fly within California raised their unrestricted fares by 15 % , amid an outcry from business travelers . Some airlines might hesitate to match Continental 's fare hikes because travelers are still upset over the last round of increases , said Edward J. Starkman , an airline industry analyst with the Paine Webber financial firm in New York . `` There is an unexplained strong demand for air travel that provides an incentive for fare increases , '' he said . He said competitors might match Continental 's fares in `` selective markets , '' rather than across the board . Despite the steady round of hikes , travel agent Jerry Steinberg said he did not think travelers would be discouraged . `` We 've had a strong demand , '' said Steinberg . CONTINENTAL 'S NEW RATES Current Maxsaver fares and those for reservations made after May 26 . For flights originating in Los Angeles to selected destinations . OFF-PEAK HOURS PEAK HOURS Current After May 26 Current After May 26 To Denver $ 238 $ 258 $ 278 $ 298 To Chicago $ 298 $ 318 $ 338 $ 358 To Ft. Lauderdale $ 358 $ 398 $ 398 $ 438 To Newark $ 358 $ 398 $ 398 $ 438 To Houston $ 278 $ 298 $ 398 $ 438