The Atlanta Braves , cellar-dwellers in the National League West , fired Manager Russ Nixon today and replaced him with General Manager Bobby Cox . Stan Kasten , the Braves ' president , made the announcement at a news conference at Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium . He also said pitching Coach Bruce Dal Canton will be replaced by Leo Mazzone , pitching coach with Atlanta 's International League farm club in Richmond , Va. , and Dal Canton will be sent to Richmond to replace Mazzone . `` There was a tremendous strain on Russ and the players . I wanted Russ to succeed , but obviously it has n't worked out , '' said Cox , who will serve as manager and general manager for the rest of the season . `` In my own mind , this was something that had to be done , '' he said . `` But it 's not a good day for me . It 's rather upsetting . When somebody fails below you , it 's the same as if you failed . '' Nixon , 55 , said Cox called him this morning to inform him he was being dismissed . `` Heck , I 've been expecting it , '' he said in a telephone interview from his home in Covington . `` It 's been evident the last two weeks . One of the bullets was going to get me , they 've been shooting so many at me . '' There had been speculation for days that Nixon would be fired , and Nixon himself acknowledged earlier this week that his job might be in jeopardy . `` They pulled me off Death Row with that one did n't they ? '' he asked after the Braves won the second game of a double-header with the Cincinnati Reds Tuesday night . Nixon , then a manager in Atlanta 's minor league system , was named manager of the Braves in 1988 after the firing of Chuck Tanner . The club was 42-79 under his direction that year and 63-97 in 1989 , finishing in the Western Division cellar both times . The Braves are in last place with a 25-40 record going into tonight 's home game with San Diego . Nixon previously had managerial experience with Cincinnati in 1982 and 1983 , when the Reds also finished in last place . Cox , in his fifth season as general manager of the Braves , managed the Toronto Blue Jays for four seasons ( 1982-85 ) and Atlanta for four seasons ( 1978-81 ) .