Lupe Lopez knew that , by herself , she could not stop the drug dealing in her Canoga Park neighborhood . Neither could she make City Hall politicians listen to her complaints about potholes or unsightly abandoned cars . But the 61-year-old grandmother of four said she stopped feeling powerless last year when she joined VOICE , Valley Organized in Community Efforts , an organization made up of members of 15 San Fernando Valley churches and synagogues . `` I did n't know we could do something before , '' said Lopez , a receptionist at a Canoga Park youth center . `` I found out that if we stand together with certain values , we can do something to change the things around us . '' VOICE has won a few victories since its founding at a boisterous meeting attended by 1,200 people in November . San Fernando city officials agreed in April to spruce up a neglected park and increase police patrols . Earlier this year , Los Angeles city officials agreed to a VOICE request and established a toll-free number for reporting abandoned cars for removal . Life Changes But beyond the group 's political accomplishments , Lopez and other members say the organization has quietly and unexpectedly transformed their lives . Lopez and other members of the group said that before VOICE was formed , they were content to help with prayer meetings and catechism classes . Now , they say , they are part-time community activists who dedicate much of their non-working lives to group meetings and public hearings , where they speak before -- and sometimes confront -- politicians and bureaucrats . Lopez attends weekly meetings of VOICE 's media committee , which she said is preparing for an anti-graffiti campaign expected to be launched this fall . `` I 've gone to so many meetings I have to look at this to remember what we 've done , '' she said , leafing through a notebook filled with newspaper clippings , mimeographed flyers and pamphlets . In fact , practically all of those pulled into VOICE 's ranks -- including accountants , priests and insurance company employees -- say they are frustrated with government inaction on social problems , such as drug abuse in their neighborhoods . `` I want my streets back , '' said Dennis Garvey , 41 , a VOICE member and Reseda resident . `` I do n't want these little hoodlums and beeper-carrying drug dealers running me off when I drive into a supermarket parking lot . '' Speaking Out Garvey , an accountant with a Santa Monica aviation company , joined VOICE last year when the pastor at St. Catherine of Siena Catholic Church in Reseda told him about the then-fledgling organization . Since then , Garvey has spoken in favor of gun control before the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors and has met with Robert Yates , the Los Angeles city parking administrator , to complain about abandoned vehicles on Valley streets . Last month , Garvey became one of nine VOICE members to attend 10 days of leadership training organized by the Industrial Areas Foundation , a nonprofit organization of professional community organizers that helped set up VOICE . The training was `` one of the most beautiful experiences I 've ever had in my life , '' said Garvey , who met community activists from Philadelphia , South-Central Los Angeles and the South Bronx of New York City at the sessions . A student leader at San Jose City College in the late 1960s , Garvey was perhaps more prepared than most for his role as a neighborhood activist . For others , learning the ropes of community organizing and public speaking has been more difficult . Just Beginning Brother Peter Vasquez of Mary Immaculate Catholic Church in Pacoima also took the 10-day training course but said he is still reluctant about taking a leadership role . `` I 'm just beginning , '' he said . `` I 'm better at talking to people one-to-one . When it comes to a big crowd , I 'm not the greatest . But I hope I will evolve into that . '' Vasquez , 50 , said he joined VOICE because he was concerned about graffiti and the physical deterioration of the East Valley neighborhood that surrounds his church . Sister Carmel Somers , a nun and full-time organizer for VOICE , said those who join the group are asked to become leaders . `` Anyone who is active in the organization is called a leader , '' she said . `` Making someone a leader is a form of recognition . When people begin to get recognition , they begin to act differently . They begin to feel they can change things . '' Somers said the group 's philosophy is inspired by the late Saul Alinsky , a community organizer whose book `` Rules for Radicals '' envisioned a political movement in which each member would be given an equal role . Thus , when VOICE addressed state Senate and Assembly committees this spring in support of a bill that would ban assault weapons , it was not only VOICE organizers who spoke . `` People who are timid and shy and do n't want to come to the microphone , we push them a little , '' Somers said . Instrumental Testimony Lynn Montgomery , an aide to Assemblyman Mike Roos ( D-Los Angeles ) , said the testimony of VOICE members before the committees was instrumental in passage of the ban on assault weapons . `` It 's certainly an organization we listen to , '' she said . `` We 've worked with them on a number of issues , the most recent being the assault weapons bill . They were very effective on that . '' Montgomery said VOICE members have also worked in support of a school construction bill sponsored by Roos . Improved street maintenance and police response times are among the issues concerning VOICE member Javier Cabrera , 32 , an insurance company representative . Cabrera said he has organized house meetings on the issues with his Canoga Park neighbors . He said he was inspired by the spirited formation meeting of the organization . `` For me , it was really uplifting , '' he said . `` I did n't expect to see people from Encino , Woodland Hills and Tarzana all with the same concerns . '' Lopez said she and her VOICE members have been able to claim a few victories since that first meeting , including some badly needed street maintenance in her Canoga Park neighborhood . `` There have been some good things , '' she said . `` The potholes have been repaired . Not all of them , but a lot of them . ''