Baseball did n't take George Steinbrenner 's team away from him Monday . It did something more necessary ; it took away his forum . For too many years , The Boss had made the New York Yankees his personal podium , almost single-handedly keeping tabloids in the banner-headline business . Long before he paid Howard Spira $ 40,000 , Steinbrenner had lost touch with the best interests of baseball , let alone those of the Yankees . Agreeing not to take Commissioner Fay Vincent 's decision to reduce him to a minority shareholder to court might have been the only thing Steinbrenner has done for baseball in a decade -- and then , it came because lawyers advised him he would lose . If Pete Rose ably represented the tragedy of greed , Steinbrenner embodied the ugliest side of wealth . For years , he hired and fired at whim , belittled employees while turning baseball 's proudest franchise into a personal toy . Vincent will allow Steinbrenner to keep a piece of his team , turn his profits and enjoy the American system of free enterprise . From now on , however , The Boss wo n't be -- and will need permission from baseball to so much as attend games . Through his actions , Vincent has sent a message that there are limits to the indignities baseball will accept . Now , and for as long as it is played , baseball must come first . Under Steinbrenner , the Yankees had ceased being New York 's team and became George 's team . When they lost , he vilified them , sent them to the minors , insulted them in print , ordered tickets withheld from certain players ' wives . When fans began chanting an anti-Steinbrenner slogan in Yankee Stadium in the early '80s , Steinbrenner told the New York Post : `` They can say anything they want . I 've got their money in my back pocket . '' For nearly two decades , he feuded with the biggest names in baseball : Reggie Jackson , Dave Winfield , Ron Guidry , Dave Righetti , Rickey Henderson , Don Mattingly . He did n't merely fire good baseball men -- all owners do that -- he tried to break them . He broke his word and the rules , frequently . In Steinbrenner 's world , success was measured by $ 500-million cable-television contracts and having his quotes played above New York Mets games on the sports pages . Money was power , until Vincent pulled the plug Monday . Finally , baseball stood up to its resident bully . In the days and weeks to come , Steinbrenner will play the martyr , telling anyone who listens that he accepted Vincent 's punishment quietly rather than drag baseball into courts where , he will argue , he most certainly would have won . It does n't matter . The man Newsweek magazine put on its cover this week -- as the most hated man in baseball -- has been told to go stand in a corner by the father figure of the game . And beginning this morning , New York will have two baseball teams again . The game is better for it .