Tom Johnson , publisher and chief executive officer of the Los Angeles Times , has announced that the newspaper will award a science and technology prize , beginning in fall , 1989 , as part of its annual Book Prize program . The science and technology prize joins existing awards in fiction , poetry , history , biography and current interest , as well as the Robert Kirsch Award for a body of work by a writer living in or writing about the American West . The Times Book Prizes have been awarded since 1980 . `` This new award adds an important new dimension to our annual Book Prizes , '' Johnson said . `` Science and technology have such a direct impact on our lives , more so than ever before . This state , for instance , is home to a score of science Nobel Prize winners and to major centers of technological and medical research . Our prize is , in a way , an acknowledgement of the importance of science to our readers . '' The new book prize is intended for works that are written for general audiences , according to Times Book Editor Jack Miles . He noted that the award relates directly to California 's pre-eminence in scientific and technological research . `` More important , it is an attempt to foster the further growth of scientific research , which depends upon a public consensus on its importance , '' Miles added . `` Even the most serious science begins with popular science . It begins when a parent gives a child a favorite book about nature . It begins when a thoughtful librarian suggests the book that initiates a lifelong adventure . These are the books , and the habits , that we hope our new prize will promote . '' The Times Book Prize winners each receive a cash prize of $ 1,000 . Nominations are solicited every year from 100 Times book reviewers . Finalists and winners are chosen by committees of three judges per category , all of whom are anonymous . The 1989 Book Prize winners will be announced in late September . The prizes will be presented in a ceremony at The Times in early November .