He may not look like the quintessential Boy Scout , but apparently singer Michael Jackson has the right Boy Scout stuff . Enough to earn him an award in his name : the Michael Jackson Good Scout Humanitarian Award . It was bestowed upon him Friday night at a benefit dinner at the Century Plaza as some 700 guests gave him many standing ovations . `` Michael Jackson is a good example to youth , helping us keep kids off the streets by supporting Scouting , '' said Ray Martin , chairman of the board of Los Angeles Area Council Boy Scouts of America . Yes , but is he brave , trustworthy and reverent ? Would he have made a good Boy Scout even though there are no badges given for glove-wearing or multiple buckle-fastening ? `` Yes , I think he epitomizes what 's good about kids , '' said Martin , also chairman and CEO of Coast Federal Bank . `` He supports what the scouting programs are doing , giving kids an alternative to street gangs . '' Perhaps Jackson represents the change of image that Boy Scouts have undergone . In Los Angeles at least , the Norman Rockwellesque vision of the freshly scrubbed Boy Scout in a khaki uniform and kerchief does n't always hold true . `` We used to be such a traditional organization , dealing only with kids in middle- and higher-income families , '' Martin said . `` Now we 're reaching out to lower-income inner-city kids . We 're modifying , changing with the times . If you go to a Scout summer camp you wo n't see kids with kerchiefs on , you 'll see kids who are finding out what it 's like to go swimming for the first time . '' The evening began with a VIP reception where Jackson posed for pictures in a corner of the room . `` God , I feel sorry for him , '' said one on-looker as Jackson appeared trapped by the crowd around him . `` It 's like he 's in a cage . '' As soon as the photo session was over , Jackson -- wearing a studded leather jacket , silver-tipped cowboy boots and sunglasses that he never took off -- escaped through a narrow passage in the back , and emerged later at the dinner in the main ballroom . He was joined there by Chuck Norris , Scott Baio , Telly Savalas , Fred Travalena , Rick Pallack ( who had received his own scouting award a few months ago ) and Barbara Davis with her children . Some of Jackson 's family , including his mother , also were on hand . Sportscaster Jim Hill ( an Eagle Scout ) emceed the show , headlined by singer Stephanie Mills . A Michael Jackson video showed screaming fans interspersed with concert footage , more screaming fans , video clips , screaming fans , interviews with celebrities about Michael Jackson , and more screaming fans . Michael Eisner , chairman of the board and CEO of the Walt Disney Co. , was dinner chairman and presented the award to Jackson , saying , `` I was n't a Boy Scout but I was an Indian Guide , and we all know that 's a whole different level . '' To the delight of his fans , Jackson said more than his usual breathy , pithy `` thank you . '' `` On behalf of the millions of past , present and future Boy Scouts , '' he said , `` I will try to abide by your motto of being prepared , and always extending a hand to others . ''