The Los Angeles County district attorney 's office has decided to retry a Los Angeles man whose murder trial in the ambush slaying of a police officer ended in a mistrial , a prosecutor said Monday . Deputy Dist . Atty . Richard L. Jenkins asked a Van Nuys Superior Court judge to set a new trial date for Duane Moody , 30 , on charges of first-degree murder . Moody is accused of supplying the weapon used to gun down Los Angeles Police Detective Thomas C. Williams , 40 , on Halloween , 1985 , as he picked up his young son at a Canoga Park church school . Judge Kathryne Ann Stoltz scheduled a tentative trial date of July 17 . At the same time , Stoltz agreed to hear a defense motion to dismiss the charge against Moody on May 11 . Defense Atty . James Epstein said he will , among other things , ask Jenkins to provide the court with new evidence that might warrant a retrial . Jenkins said he believes that he has enough evidence for a new trial . Stoltz declared a mistrial on the murder charge against Moody on March 20 after jurors said they were deadlocked on the verdict . The jury on March 15 had acquitted Moody on a charge of conspiracy to commit murder . Moody was one of five men charged with first-degree murder in the Williams slaying . The same jury that deadlocked on the murder charge against Moody convicted Voltaire Williams , 26 , of conspiracy to commit murder in February but acquitted him of murder . Last month , that jury acquitted Reecy Clem Cooper , 34 , of both charges . Two other men , Daniel Jenkins , 33 , and Rubin Antonio Moss , 26 , were convicted of murder in a separate trial last year . In October , Daniel Jenkins was sentenced to die in the gas chamber , and two months later , Moss received a sentence of life imprisonment . Moody admitted furnishing the automatic assault weapon used to kill the detective and was accused of helping to hide the gun . Epstein said Moody gave the gun to Daniel Jenkins because he was intimidated by him . However , he said his client had put glue in the gun 's safety in an effort to render it inoperable . Earlier , Epstein had said to retry his client would be `` a waste of taxpayers ' money . ''