Supporters of the Los Angeles City Council 's ethics-and-pay-raise package failed Thursday in a behind-the-scenes attempt to gain control of the writing of the opposition argument that is to be placed on the June ballot along with the proposal . The maneuver prompted a bitter complaint from Councilman Zev Yaroslavsky , a foe of the package , who said its proponents were trying to sabotage the opposition `` with rank , gutter political maneuvering . '' Yaroslavsky told reporters that a council member who opposed the package ought to write the opposition argument . Instead , backers of the package had enlisted Councilman Gilbert Lindsay , who voted for it , to nominate himself to write the opposition language , Yaroslavsky said . The maneuver was abandoned Thursday when Council President John Ferraro selected Councilwoman Ruth Galanter , an opponent of the package , to draw up the opposition statement . According to a source involved in the matter , it was Ferraro who had asked Lindsay 's staff to write a letter requesting that Lindsay be appointed for the task . Bob Gay , Lindsay 's chief deputy , confirmed Thursday that he had been asked by another council member to write the letter . Gay declined to say who made the request . Lindsay , 89 , has suffered a stroke , is in poor health and is not up to the task , Yaroslavsky said . Had Lindsay gotten the assignment , the outcome would have been a weak opposition argument controlled by supporters of the package . The measure approved Wednesday would establish public financing of political campaigns , ban outside jobs and honorariums for elected officials , restrict gifts they may receive and bar them from lobbying for one year after they leave office . The ballot statements , 300- to 500-word explanations , are `` pivotal '' and will be the opponents ' `` only vehicle to communicate with the voters , '' said Yaroslavsky , who voted against the package Wednesday along with Councilman Ernani Bernardi . Galanter did not vote . Yaroslavsky called the tactic `` unethical '' and said backers of the package attempted it `` out of fear that a coherent argument would be written against this Charter amendment . '' `` People who are duly qualified and have opposed the measure out of conviction and not out of manipulation should have the opportunity to write that argument , '' Yaroslavsky said . `` Mr. Lindsay in all likelihood would not have been capable of writing an argument in the time allotted . '' Ferraro denied any role in the matter and said all he knew was that he had received a letter signed by Lindsay requesting that he be permitted to write the opposition statement . Yaroslavsky said : `` It 's a sad situation and it 's having an impact on public policy . . . . Gil has been physically incapacitated since his stroke . He is not the same Gil he was before . '' In an interview Thursday , Lindsay said he did not want to write the opposition statement . When asked about the letter that Ferraro had received from him , Lindsay responded , `` I guess I changed my mind . '' Told of Yaroslavsky 's comments about his health , Lindsay said : `` How would he know what my capabilities are ? I 've been doing pretty well all these years . '' Lindsay has served on the council for 27 years .