GOODFELLA PAUL Sorvino is reaping the benefits of appearing in Martin Scorcese 's lavishly praised `` GoodFellas '' gangster flick . He has just signed two new movie deals . The first with Rita Moreno , called `` Life in the Fast Food Chain , '' and then he moves on to Disney for an as-yet-untitled film with Timothy Dalton , who is taking a respite from his duties as James Bond . IN WASHINGTON , they are talking about Stacy Keach ! Keach opened last week at the Folger Theater in `` Richard III '' to incredible reviews -- the kind most actors only dream of . Some critics have gone so far as to call Stacy , once TV 's Mike Hammer , `` the new Laurence Olivier '' ! ( Oh , look , let 's just leave that alone . ) Stacy , his wife , Malgosia , and their new baby are settled in Washington until his sold-out stint as `` Richard III '' closes Nov. 10 . I TOLD you the other day that word of mouth on Barbra Streisand 's `` The Prince of Tides '' movie is just great , and how happy Barbra is with her leading man , Nick Nolte . Well , it seems that everybody connected with Barbra 's labor of love ( she is the director , the star and the producer ) is happy at this point . Pat Conroy , who wrote the book on which the film is based , has this to say : `` Streisand 's smart as hell to take this novel of biblical length and pretension and break it down into a movie . She 's not afraid of anything . Her sheer will is the reason this movie is getting made . '' `` The Prince of Tides '' is still filming , and obviously nobody can predict a hit or miss , no matter the talent involved . But I do foresee that by the time this movie is ready for release , we will be in the grips of Streisand-mania . This is , after all , Barbra 's first big screen effort since `` Yentl , '' way back in -- can you believe it -- 1984 ? ! THE GREAT actress Sylvia Sidney was all but given up for dead earlier this year . She was dreadfully ill and even in a coma at one point . But now Sidney , who began her movie career in 1929 , has made an amazing health comeback , and will be on hand to receive honors from the Film Society of Lincoln Center on Nov. 20 in New York .