Deuce Coupe ( Deuce Coupe ) . Shooting in Virginia . Paul LeMat and Candy Clark star in this coming-of-ager set in 1958 . The story centers on two brothers , the younger one struggling to emerge from the shadows of the elder one , and the car that symbolizes their dreams . Producer Bob Sloat . Director Mark Deimel . Screenwriter Jim Nichols . Also stars Kieran Mulroney , Brian Bloom , Danielle Von Zerneck and Ashley Laurence . Late summer release . Die Hard 2 ( Gordon/Silver ) . Shooting in L.A. and Denver . Bruce Willis returns with probably a raise from the piddling $ 5 million he raked in for the first one . This time out , intrepid NYC cop John McClane takes on an elite special forces unit , headed by a former U.S. military officer , which has seized a major U.S. airport . Executive producers Michael Levy and Lloyd Levin . Producers Lawrence Gordon , Joel Silver and Charles Gordon . `` Nightmare on Elm Street IV 's '' Renny Harlin directs . Screenwriters Doug Richardson and Steven deSouza . Distributor Fox . Summer release . Filofax ( Hollywood Pictures ) . Shooting in L.A. A new comedy from `` See No Evil , Here No Evil 's '' Arthur Hiller . Jim Belushi , fresh from a prison break , stumbles upon a businessman Charles Grodin 's appointment book and decides to assume his identity . Executive producer Paul Mazursky . Producer Geoffrey Taylor . Screenwriter Jill Mazursky and Jeffrey Abrams . Also stars Loryn Locklin and Brooke Adams . Distributor Buena Vista . Summer release . Night Eyes ( Amritraj-Baldwin ) . Shooting in L.A. Security guard Andrew Stevens goes on sleaze patrol as he spies on the estranged wife of a rock star to gather dirt , which will be used against her at the divorce trial . The woman ( Tanya Roberts ) foils his objective by charming the pants off of him . Executive producer Howard Baldwin . Producer Ashok Amritraj . Director Jag Mundhra . Screenwriters Tom Citrano and Stevens . Also stars Karen Baldwin . Scanners II : A New Order ( Lance/Malofilm ) . Shooting in Montreal . This sequel to the 1981 David Cronenberg skullbuster deals with the son of the original `` good '' scanner who uses his gift of telekinesis to ward off the evil New Order . Executive producer Pierre David and Tom Berry . Producer Rene Malo . Director Christian Dugauay . Screenwriter B.J . Nelson . Stars David Hewlett , Deborah Raffin and Yvon Ponton . Distributor Image . Street War ! ( Street Wise ) . Shooting in L.A. Los Angeles gang warfare is the backdrop as a prominent detective manages to get leaders from rival Latino and black factions to agree to a truce on a local TV show . Chaos envelops the television studio when one of the Latino members flips out and grabs a hostage during the show . Executive producers Peter Rath and Richard Schulenberg . Producers Rath and Robert J. Hyatt . Director/screenwriter Hyatt . Stars Don Stroud , David Labiosa , Arthur Fuller and Mike Moroff . Spring release . David Pecchia