The Rev . Jesse Jackson is better at using the camera than talking to it . Yet his new weekly series airing at 5 p.m. Sundays on KCAL Channel 9 -- and named , of all things , `` Jesse Jackson '' -- ranks among the most important additions to television in years . Not because Jackson has sharpened his enunciation . On the contrary , for someone known for swaying crowds with fiery oratory , he often slurs his words so badly that it takes all your concentration just to understand what he 's saying . Not because he 's skilled at interviewing and leading panel discussions . He is n't , evidenced by Sunday 's taped premiere , which focused almost entirely on the status of Native Americans . Not because his syndicated series is silky smooth . It has kinks galore , including an eclectic audience that did not participate in Sunday 's show or even make a sound . It was nothing more than a multiracial backdrop , a prop . Not because he totally sheds his self-serving , personal-puffery cloak . He said Sunday that those Mohawks protesting plans for building a golf course on their ancient burial grounds in Oka , Quebec , `` invited us there to hear their story . '' So . . . Cut to Jackson being refused entry to the area by Canadian troops . Cut to Jackson holding an impromptu press conference there . Cut to Jackson visiting a Mohawk `` survivor school . '' Cut to Jackson receiving a sweat shirt from the Mohawks . Cut to Jackson making a speech to them . Cut to Jackson with Canada 's Indian minister , who tells Jackson that he warned the local mayor `` not to go ahead with the golf course . '' Was the story the Mohawks ' protest . . . or Jackson 's ? What gives `` Jesse Jackson '' so much promise is obviously none of the above . What you love about it are its fresh eyes . It 's Jackson the reformer , not Jackson the performer , who stars here . Thanks to him , this show swims against the TV mainstream by giving voice to the voiceless in a medium known for its narrow range of opinion in news and public affairs programs . Just think about it . Rarely do Native Americans get more than sound bites . But on Sunday , they got almost the entire hour , including a 15-minute package in which American Indian activist Russell Means ( who led the Wounded Knee uprising in South Dakota in 1973 ) visited three reservations where Native Americans in the United States were said to be facing problems similar to those in Oka . Hearing the Earth described by Native Americans as `` our mother '' puts many of their conflicts with whites in context , and these visual essays with Means were an eloquent expression of the Native American outlook . Next came Jackson leading a panel discussion participated in by a treaties attorney , Means and two other Native American leaders . The Bureau of Indian Affairs declined to participate , he said . In light of this , and the discussion 's strong tilt , Jackson should have been a better devil 's advocate . Yet `` Jesse Jackson '' is intended to have a point of view , and the Native American views expressed here -- charges ranging from whites trampling on Indian rights to institutionalized stereotyping -- are valid ones generally excluded from TV . Even with its flaws , `` Jesse Jackson '' promises to be strikingly distinctive and valuable , affirming this time that there 's more than one civil rights struggle in the U.S .