'' Romance of the Taj Mahal , '' opening today at the County Museum of Art , is a wondrous exhibition that is at once scholarly , affectionate and generous -- like the Magi bearing exotic gifts for the holidays . It spills forth about 250 exquisite miniature paintings , architectural models , details and drawings , precious jewels , sinister daggers , waxen jades and lush textiles . It is , irresistibly , about love . As the world knows , the Taj Mahal was built as a tomb by the Mogul emperor Shah Jahan in Agra on the banks of the Jamuna River after the demise of his favorite wife , Mumtaz Mahal . She died during a military campaign in 1631 while giving birth to her 14th child . The Taj became one of the world 's most celebrated buildings , not because it is a great historical monument like the pyramids of Giza or the Greek Acropolis , but because of the refinement of its design , the richness of marble and inlay and -- most of all -- the romance that fueled it . In an old Noel Coward play estranged lovers meet . He has taken a trip around the world to ease his broken heart and she asks him if he saw a sacred elephant in India . `` They 're lint white , I believe , and very , very sweet , '' she says . `` Of course you saw it in the moonlight . '' `` Yes , '' he replies , `` moonlight can be cruelly deceptive . '' That elephant was surely the Taj . The exhibition ( through March 11 ) is the brainchild of LACMA 's super-smart senior curator of Indian and Southeast Asian art , Pratapaditya Pal . Specialized sections were supervised by Janice Leoshko , Joseph M. Dye III and Stephen Markel . All contributed to a catalogue that virtually must be read to get the most from the show . Scholarly enthusiasm occasionally overloads prose ( and readers ' fuses ) , but tenacious attention is rewarded . The show is deeply engaging even without the catalogue in mind , but it is also a curious business . For one thing , it is a Godot-like play in which the main character , of necessity , never appears . The closest we get to the Taj is through a large model that acts as the exhibition frontispiece . This replica was made by an Agra jeweler . In 1939 , it came to the New York World 's Fair and was later picked up by an Indian expatriate who used it as the centerpiece for his restaurant in Florida . When it came to LACMA , it was encrusted in curry grease . In short , this serious exhibition launches itself with a substantial piece of kitsch . Pal 's catalogue introduction concentrates amusingly on modern commercial exploitation such as an advertisement that shows a splendid view of the Taj mirrored in its famous reflecting pool . The caption reads , `` When Shah Jahan saw the contractor 's bid did he say , 'Make the pool a little smaller ? '' -- a question aimed at persuading consumers that it 's worth it to pay more for Johnny Walker Red Label Scotch . The curator has donnish fun pointing out other examples , such as the rock-blues musician who took `` Taj Mahal '' as his nom de microphone . Now his friends say , `` Hi , Taj '' and headwaiters greet him solemnly as `` Mr . Mahal . '' This is all a giggle , but emphasis puts a different spin on the show , giving it the aura of a contemporary media-art exhibition out for social criticism and demythification . The catalogue 's final section is devoted to representations of the Taj mainly by later Europeans . Part of Pal 's thesis is that nobody thought the building was such a big deal until the British moved into India . He wonders out loud whether the romance of the Taj is not largely a Western rather than an Indian phenomenon . The section proves the point , but in a funny way , because no really substantial Western artist ever messed into the place except Rembrandt , who collected Indian miniatures at a distance . One is inclined to see the mystification of the Taj as part of the 19th-Century Romantics ' passion for the exotic . But no big-name European artist was ever magnetized to India in the way Morocco attracted Delacroix or the South Seas seduced Gauguin . Just too far , I guess . The big cheeses here are no more renowned than England 's Albert Goodwin , Japan 's Hiroshi Yoshida and the American photographer Mitch Epstein . The section fizzles slightly on account of this but underlines the Taj 's charm as being probably as much a popular as an aesthetic phenomenon . When we set the comparatively clunky Euro-American art next to the ethereal delicacy of original Mogul , one thing is certain : We may love the Taj , but we got her wrong . Instructive as this section is , there is a tendency for the concept to swamp the art and hint of sourness in the subtext . It is dispelled by Shah Jahan 's art as by a spoon of raspberry ice . He descended on one side from the Mongol emperor Genghis Khan ( Mogul comes from Mongol ) and on the other side from Timur -- called Tamerlane -- making this exhibition a direct continuation of LACMA 's recent estimable , `` Timur , the Princely Vision . '' While Shah Jahan 's ancestors are towering historical figures , he is best remembered as a patron and aesthete . There is something rococo about his aesthetic . Floral motifs appear everywhere , heavy with religious symbolism but rendered with tremulous sensitivity . Not that Shah Jahan did n't live in the real world . His story suggests a kind of miniature epic . Born in 1592 under the most favorable astrological configuration , he nonetheless had a father ( the emperor Jahangir ) who was a drunk and a druggie . The boy was promptly taken away from his mother and spoiled rotten by a surrogate and his grandfather , Akbar . When it came time to ascend the throne he had to battle his stepmother for his rightful place . Years later , when he was old and ill , his sons schemed , poisoned and fought over the succession . Not a very nice bunch in the crunch , but you would never know it from the art . Idealization is the hallmark of Shah Jahan 's art . We see the real world through it but with the sting removed . When a respected old man is caught en flagrante in bed with a young boy , the shock and humiliation of it are muffled into a rather kindly prank . There is a kind of moral tolerance running through the art that recalls Lady Murasaki 's classic `` Tales of Genji . '' In the paintings , much of this effect comes from our natural response to things in miniature , but there is more to it . Shah Jahan employed some of the most gifted artists of his day . They lose nothing of inventiveness and skill in drawing a head the size of your fingernail . Balchand 's illuminations , like `` A Warrior Frightened by Tribesmen , '' cast an aura of legend over a plausible event . A preference for night settings lends mystery . Govardhan 's `` Four Mullas '' is a dream seen through the veil of dusk . Anonymous images of birds and animals have a Rousseau-like presence that reminds us that poetry was virtually the native language of the culture . Mogul realism has the rich greens of Oz , and its kaleidoscopic abstract designs tinkle with the trees of the seven dancing princesses . In reality Shah Jahan was a busy ruler who rose at dawn and worked until evening . The art shows only moments of pomp and relaxation : an equestrian night wedding feast that seems illuminated by a million fireflies , harem girls bathing at night , the prince watching an elephant fight , the prince communing with ascetics . If life is poeticized , its reality of a bedizined existence is proved by the decorative arts section with its gourd-shaped jade bowls , sumptuous jewels and fabrics as light as butterfly wings or as textured as fur . Occasionally another reality intrudes , in push daggers designed to maximize the fatal thrust . It is a pity to have so little architecture in a show about the Taj Mahal . But photos , drawings and fragments can only do so much . At least what they do underlines the essence of Shah Jahan 's aesthetic . There is a fragment of a beautifully carved screening door on view that looks from a few paces off like wood . It turns out to be stone and that sense of lightness turns out to be a central clue . It 's easy enough for a Western cynic to suspect that both the fact and symbolism of the Taj are not really about romance but about luxury -- an easy mistake to make at the end of the voracious '80s . But anybody who takes a really good look must see that in the end it is about luxury transcending itself . Indian visitors from philosophers to plebes have remarked on how the Taj seems weightless and otherworldly . This art begins with luxury but comes out the other end as a dream of perfumed peace , sensual ease and grace .