Mimi Rogers sees a gleam of hope that women may one day achieve equal status in today 's macho movie world . `` It 's an unfortunate fact that there are many more roles for men than there are for women . A favorable sign is the success of films like 'Pretty Woman ' and 'Ghosts ' -- much more successful than big , male-dominated action films , '' she said . `` With these two films , in which women are on more of an equal level , being so successful , maybe the trend will start to shift in the direction of having men and women really co-starring . '' If not equal , Rogers has a vital role in `` Desperate Hours , '' with Mickey Rourke and Anthony Hopkins . It 's Dino De Laurentiis ' update of the 1955 movie , with Rogers in the part originated by Martha Scott . Rourke plays the Humphrey Bogart role of a criminal psycho who takes a suburban family hostage . Hopkins has the part of the husband , originally played by Fredric March . Rogers has three new films : `` Desperate Hours '' ; `` The Doors , '' Oliver Stone 's biography of rocker Jim Morrison ; and `` The Rapture , '' an apocalyptic drama . Last January , she and Tom Cruise ended their three-year marriage , during which she seemed to be subordinating her own career as his zoomed skyward . She corrected that impression : `` I actually worked quite a bit . Unfortunately , two of the films that I did have n't been released in this country . '' `` I did a picture for Vestron called 'Hider in the House ' ( with Gary Busey ) that got caught up in the company 's bankruptcy . Then I did a film with James Belushi called 'To Forget Palermo . ' We spent 14 weeks shooting that . It was an Italian-financed film -- an English ( language ) film with an Italian director . That 's always a bit of an experiment , '' she said . `` I do n't know what happened to it . Maybe American distributors looked at it and thought it was n't going to make money . Both of those films , I think , have been released internationally but not here . So there 's an apparent void that did n't really exist . '' Like her former husband , Mimi ( short for Miriam ) Rogers had a traveling childhood . Both their fathers were engineers who took jobs all over . Rogers was born in Coral Gables , Fla. , but she moved to Virginia , Arizona , Michigan , England and finally Los Angeles . A good student , she graduated from high school at 14 , and started acting in her 20s . Her first film was `` Blue Skies Again '' with Harry Hamlin . She usually plays `` the love interest . '' But she hopes that will change as movies take a feminine tilt .