As casually as if she were describing the plot of a TV show , Linda explains to her women 's support group that she missed the last few meetings because she was close to death from double pneumonia . At 22 , Linda ( not her real name ) is showing the ravages of AIDS . She is pale , and her big T-shirt and bright green skirt reveal how thin she has become . Her weight has dropped from 128 pounds to 96 . She contracted the virus , called HIV , from her hemophiliac boyfriend , who was infected by a blood transfusion before testing blood products for the virus that causes acquired immune deficiency syndrome began in 1985 . Many of the women in her AIDS group contracted the disease years ago , through contaminated drug needles or through sex with a man who used intravenous drugs or was bisexual . It was not known then that such behavior was high risk . But some uninfected women today are making those same fatal errors because they believe AIDS is not a woman 's disease , assuming it is an illness confined to male homosexuals and intravenous drug users . Diane Bonne and her education staff at the San Diego AIDS Foundation -- who talk to 3,000 people a month in businesses , churches and schools about the threat of AIDS -- say most women seem to distance themselves from the threat , believing it 's not their problem . She doubts that most are taking precautions against the disease they treat so casually . Bonne finds that many women , especially minorities , feel unable to talk about condoms with their partners or to insist on safe sex practices . But women who today live with that sense of safety may die with AIDS . Linda and her friends are well beyond such denial in the intimacy of their group , which is sponsored by UC San Diego 's Owen Clinic and the HIV Neuro-behavioral Research Center . Of 30 local services for AIDS patients , this is the only one exclusively for women . Here , they have found a haven where they can deal with the fears , anger and triumphs they experience in living with a death sentence . For some it is the only haven , for they have told few people the nature of their illness , to avoid discrimination . Most feel great stigma and shame from the disease because society associates it with drug use , prostitution and homosexuality . So far , these women are an apparent anomaly . The San Diego County Department of Health Services reports that only 100 women in the county have full-blown AIDS , about 4 % of the 2,251 people with the disease in the county . But Dr. Michelle Ginsberg , county health epidemiologist , estimates that 30,000 men and women in San Diego are now HIV-positive , meaning they are infected with the AIDS virus . Although Ginsberg offered no statistics on the proportion of HIV-infected women , she said the number is rising . Nationally , 7 % of all AIDS cases diagnosed by 1988 involved women . By September , 1990 , that figure had climbed to 10.5 % of the 149,500 total cases diagnosed . But a look eastward reveals some startling figures . In some Central African nations , 20 % of the adult urban population has AIDS , and equal numbers of men and women are infected . In New York City and northern New Jersey , AIDS is the leading cause of death for women ages 25 to 35 . White , middle-class women may be lulled into a sense of indifference and security by the fact that 70 % of the females infected nationwide are black and Latina . Many of these women live in poor , urban areas of high drug use . Although middle-class white women may never become a major part of the AIDS epidemic , the disease is lethal , and anyone with a possibility of exposure should practice safe sex . For women of all races who already have AIDS , ignorance and prejudice may accompany the disease . Some health providers insist that many doctors fail to recognize persistent gynecological infections as the first signs of the virus in women . Physicians may believe that a female patient is not in a high-risk group and therefore fail to perform a test for the virus . To compound the problem , most women wo n't qualify for social welfare assistance once their disease is diagnosed and they become disabled . That is because some of the symptoms experienced only by women -- such as chronic pelvic inflammation , yeast infections and vaginal thrush -- are not listed by the federal Centers for Disease Control as typical of full-blown AIDS . The CDC criteria for AIDS are used by social service agencies to determine who receives disability benefits . CDC scientists based their early definition of the disease on symptoms seen only in gay men . Currently , 65 % of the women who die of AIDS do not qualify for social service benefits under CDC guidelines . But , according to the CDC , there are no immediate plans to change the guidelines . Financial assistance , welfare and medical benefits are critical in the advanced stages of the disease , when all AIDS victims suffer from opportunistic infections , such as pneumonia , meningitis and tuberculosis -- until one illness proves fatal . But hope is always there . The women in the AIDS support group frequently talk about new drugs and rumors of cures . The possibility of returning to normalcy and getting on with their lives is the unspoken obsession . These women 's lives are testimony that AIDS is not just another venereal disease and certainly not a disease of just gay men and drug users . What is the solution ? How do we prevent infection today that would spell death in the years to follow ? The beginning is through education for all women -- about the delicate subjects of safe sex practices , drug use , homosexuality and bisexuality . That and a healthy dose of , `` Yes , it can happen to me , '' can influence a woman to take control of her future .