A successful exterior house make-over starts with an honest assessment of what needs to be fixed . According to Remodeling Ideas magazine , most houses in need of help suffer from one of these problems : -- Not enough detail : A home without interesting architectural details is rarely memorable . Details can be added with shutters , window boxes , trim , moldings or other new features . Use paint to accent present detailing . -- Too much detail : Some houses mix too many materials and styles . Take such houses back to basics . Strip away odd-ball elements . Paint mismatched material the same color or invest in unified cladding . -- Poor proportions : Use landscaping tricks or a new color scheme to shape up a house with awkward lines . Consider dormers , porches or a new entry to balance the exterior . As architectural details are added and subtracted , go for a look that 's consistent with the basic lines , age and setting of the home . To help visualize the changes , try this : Enlarge a photo of the home 's exterior , then put tracing paper over the top . Trace the house , then sketch in features that are being considered . Many exterior make-overs start with paint . To bring out the best in a home , use three colors : a basic field color for siding or brick ; a trim color for borders around windows and doors and the soffit and fascia ; and an accent color , for shutters , the front door , and any other small details . Keep in mind the roof color as the scheme is planned . Ideas for color schemes can be picked up from homes that are admired or from groupings suggested by paint manufacturers . Some paint stores offer a video color selection service . Homeowners can look at a video image of a house styled like theirs and see how it looks painted in different combinations . Cladding a house with new materials may be the best choice if the old exterior is unattractive , mismatched or if an all-new look is wanted . Choices include : -- Wood siding : Beveled wood siding , especially narrow clapboard , is still the look of tradition . For a contemporary look , use a top grade of cedar or redwood and stain it . -- Synthetic sidings : Vinyl or aluminum sidings mimic the look of wood , sometimes very well . Consider leaving special window or door trims exposed so character is n't sacrificed . Or , have trim custom-clad with aluminum that 's molded to fit on-site . To add detail , ask about special trims for windows , doors and eaves . -- Wood shakes and shingles : Shakes are rough-hewn for a more rustic look . Shingles are cut smoother ; trim siding with fancy-cut shingles for a Victorian flavor . -- Brick and stone veneers : These are premium products , and they denote long-lasting quality . They can be applied only on the front , or around the entire house . -- Stucco : This mixture of cement , sand and water makes the look of many Southwestern , Tudor and contemporary homes . New stucco systems not only refinish a home but insulate it , too .