When computer scientists Gary Knott and Barry Bunow started their own software company on a shoestring , a big advertising budget was out of the question . That 's why the pair from Bethesda , Md. , picked a name that expressed what they invent : Civilized Software . `` You should be as descriptive as you can about what you really produce , '' advised Knott , chief executive officer . The company , which does mathematical modeling for academics and research scientists , prides itself on software that 's more than user-friendly and wanted to convey that in the name . `` User-friendly does n't capture the idea of civility , '' said Knott , who went into business for himself after retiring from the U.S. Public Health Service . `` We produce software that is not condescending or obscure , software at which people do n't become annoyed . '' With just $ 30,000 in sales in the 2 1/2 months since its product went to market , Civilized Software is too poor to launch a big marketing drive . But experts say the company took the right approach by selecting a name that was relatively simple and descriptive rather than arcane or technical . `` The biggest mistake high-tech companies make is that they talk to themselves and not to their customers . They look inward rather than outward , '' said S.B . Master , the president of Master-McNeil Inc. , a San Francisco company that helps technology companies name themselves and their products . Too often , Master says , such companies select overly technical names that can intimidate rather than attract would-be customers . `` The idea of names is to communicate , '' she said . It 's a rare company that can get away with an obscure name , say identity consultants , who are paid to assist in the naming process . In particular , use of founders ' own names , which rarely have meaning to the public , offer little to a new company , they say . It is hard to overestimate the importance of a company 's identity , says Joel Portugal , a partner in Anspach Grossman Portugal Inc. , a New York-based firm that helps businesses select names , logos and other identifiers . Before seeking a specific name , Portugal says , a client is asked how the name will fit with the client 's business strategy . American Express , for example , wanted to create a credit card distinct from its traditional card . It also wanted the name to convey that the card would allow a user to maximize personal finance options . `` Optima '' was derived from optimize and maximize . Anspach Grossman Portugal uses its own software to process the answers to key questions about naming criteria . Working with the criteria , the computer offers numerous words related to the client 's objective . `` Navistar , '' for instance , was a computer-generated name related to the former International Harvester 's objective that the name relate to navigation and direction . But identity consultants caution that a computer program is n't the be-all and end-all in the naming process . Even when a computer is used , it is usually a person who refines the rough suggestions into proposed names . Then the names are often placed before a focus group to determine how they will sound to the public . `` What 's a stupid name today usually in three to five years from now is n't stupid , '' Portugal said . Both `` Exxon '' and `` Xerox '' sounded silly to the public when first presented , he said . But the idea is not to solicit emotional reactions from a focus group . Rather , it is to present the group with a list of criteria and have members select the names that best fit the criteria . A fabricated name is often best for a company with widespread operations . That 's because a name must clear a rigorous search to be sure it 's legally available in all states and countries where a business intends to operate or sell its products . And the proliferation of global products has made name competition all the keener . `` Trademark lawyers earn their money -- it 's a very tedious process , '' Portugal said . It 's far better to go through this often lengthy process beforehand rather than be faced with a lawsuit or the need to change a name later , identity consultants say . Another vital step involves clearing the name in foreign languages . A name may sound fine in English , yet have a negative or embarrassing meaning in a foreign language . And with more overseas sales , cross-cultural implications are becoming more important , Portugal says . American Express , for instance , was extremely careful that `` Optima '' had no bad connotations in the Far East , since it is determined to market the card there . Despite the importance of a name , too many companies wait until the last minute to make a selection , Master said . `` If you wait that long , it becomes a big , emotional thing within the company , '' she said . `` It 's best to start thinking about a product name at least six months before the product is due to be shipped , '' she said . Cute , tricky names are typically poor choices , even if they meet an initially warm reception around the office , according to Masters . Once the novelty has worn off , the name can become tiring and work against the company 's best interest in the marketplace . There are exceptions to the rule , however . Such a name could work well , for instance , for a computer game or children 's company , she noted .