Everybody who celebrates Christmas is looking forward to tomorrow afternoon , Miss Manners trusts . Yes , she knows that you plan to open your presents in the morning , or perhaps Christmas Eve night . What she had in mind was the happy anticipation of spending Christmas afternoon writing thank-you letters . What an opportunity this is to curl up cozily in a favorite corner , with a trusted old fountain pen and piles of enticingly fresh paper at hand , and dash off notes expressive of your gratitude at being remembered , your delight in new possessions , and your overflowing warmth toward those who took so much care on your behalf . It also gives Christmas dinner a chance to settle . Miss Manners is hearing some murmurs from the crowd . Perhaps there are questions concerning this simple and rewarding task . Yes ? You , there , holding the , ah -- what is that thing , anyway ? `` Exactly , '' you reply . `` What about something I hate ? Do I still have to write a thank-you note , and if so , what can I possibly say ? '' Miss Manners should not have to point out that it is just as much trouble to select a useless , ugly object as it is a treasure . It is therefore necessary for the unlucky recipient to render thanks for an unwelcome present as much as for a welcome one . But as the giver obviously did not know how useless and ugly the stupid thing was , the goal of the thank-you letter is to avoid enlightening him or her on this point . It should therefore be indistinguishable from one written out of genuine appreciation . `` How can I do that without lying ? '' Miss Manners wishes that just once in a while she would hear such declarations of devotion to honesty when it is not a question of getting out of a task ( or delivering an insult ) . There should be no trouble about saying honestly how grateful you were to be remembered . Since a thank-you letter must also contain something about the present , Miss Manners recommends to the morally fastidious the words wonderful , terrific and awesome . A ghastly present can easily be any one of these , as your dictionary will confirm . `` Do I have to write to people I thanked in person ? '' Only for extraordinary presents . An oral `` Gee , I really liked the car '' is not enough ; a written document after a personal exchange of fruitcakes is too much . `` Can I save time by doing my thank-you letters on the computer ? '' Do you suppose that your grandparents do n't recognize an all-purpose computer paragraph when they see one ? Thank-you letters must be handwritten . Miss Manners does give special dispensation to those for whom that is a hardship -- if the writing hand is arthritic , for example -- but will no longer tolerate abuses of this indulgence from those who are too lazy to write legibly . `` Can I fax it ? '' Yes , provided that you are not violating the rule against using office equipment for personal business . Miss Manners is not unreasonable ; she likes toys as much as the next person who tries to dignify them under the name of technology . DEAR MISS MANNERS -- Should signet and monogram rings be worn so that the crest and initials face the person wearing the ring , or in the opposite direction so that the face of the ring is upright for an observer ? GENTLE READER -- Miss Manners hopes you do not fancy that such a ring has the same purpose as a designer label , explaining the provenance of the body wearing it . As it is not intended to be read by appraisers , it is not worn to face the public .