USC has n't beaten Notre Dame in eight years . Stanford did it last week . That alone should be enough to motivate USC , which has a 14-game unbeaten streak against the Cardinal going into today 's game at Stanford Stadium , where USC has lost only once in the last 34 years -- and not since 1970 , when Jim Plunkett was a Stanford senior . Stanford is 2-3 overall and 1-1 in the Pacific 10 Conference , but its record belies its abilities . The Cardinal lost to Colorado in its opener , 21-17 , when Eric Bieniemy scored on a one-yard , fourth-down run with 12 seconds left . It lost to UCLA the next week at the Rose Bowl , 32-31 , when Brad Daluiso kicked a 21-yard field goal with one second to play . USC ( 4-1 , 1-1 ) is still expected to extend its winning streak in the 69-year-old stadium to 11 games , but not without a struggle . `` This game means everything to us , '' USC Coach Larry Smith said . Stanford , a loser against San Jose State two weeks ago , stunned No . 1-ranked and previously unbeaten Notre Dame , 36-31 , last Saturday at South Bend , Ind. , ending a 12-game winless streak on the road . The Cardinal boasts a variety of offensive weapons : -- Quarterback Jason Palumbis , his injured right shoulder surgically repaired last November , has discovered after sitting on the bench last season that he can still throw . He has completed 70.4 % of his passes to put him on a pace to break Turk Schonert 's one-season school record of 67 % and to challenge the Pac-10 record of 70.7 % , set by former California quarterback Rich Campbell in 1980 . Palumbis , who completed 26 of 34 passes for 256 yards against Notre Dame , has been even more accurate after halftime , completing 77 % of his second-half passes , including 15 of 17 against the Irish . `` I 've never seen anything like it , '' Smith said . -- Halfback Glyn Milburn , a transfer from Oklahoma , is a multiple threat and ranks fifth in the nation in all-purpose running . A sophomore who rushed for a state-record 2,718 yards as a senior at Santa Monica High three years ago , Milburn is among the Pac-10 leaders in rushing , receiving , kickoff-return yardage and punt-return yardage . `` The ( most important ) addition to their team , '' Smith said . -- Split end Ed McCaffrey , who has caught 34 passes for 450 yards since missing the Cardinal 's opener because of back spasms , leads the nation in receptions per game and ranks third in the nation in receiving yardage . A senior from Allentown , Pa. , and older brother of Duke basketball player Billy McCaffrey , he is on a pace to break the conference one-season records for total receptions and receiving yardage . -- Fullback Tommy Vardell , who scored on four one-yard runs against Notre Dame , has 11 touchdowns this season , eight from one yard out and none on a run of longer than eight yards . He needs only two more rushing touchdowns to break Brad Muster 's single-season school record and 11 to tie a conference record shared by former USC tailbacks O.J . Simpson and Marcus Allen . Vardell , who has rushed for only 199 yards , has scored most of his touchdowns behind Bob Whitfield , a 6-foot-7 , 300-pound sophomore tackle from Banning High in Wilmington who was recruited by USC , among many others . `` He 's really a dominant player , '' Cardinal Coach Dennis Green said . It 's no wonder Stanford has scored a touchdown or a field goal on 20 of 22 possessions inside its opponents ' 20-yard line . The red zone , as it 's called , has been the Cardinal zone . On defense , Stanford has not been as efficient . The Cardinal has been out-gained in all but one of its games . Still , Stanford held Notre Dame to seven second-half points in overcoming a 24-7 deficit last week . `` They 've put it all together , '' Smith said . And at a bad time for USC . Trojan Notes USC tailback Ricky Ervins , who has not participated in contact drills since suffering a sprained left ankle Sept. 29 at Ohio State , did not make the trip . He will again be replaced by sophomore Mazio Royster , who ran for 203 yards and three touchdowns last Saturday night in a 30-17 victory over Washington State at the Coliseum . . . . Backup guard Kian Ramsay did not make the trip because of a neck sprain . USC has n't lost to Stanford since 1975 , when the Cardinal won , 13-10 , at the Coliseum . In 1979 , behind quarterback Turk Schonert , Stanford rallied from a 21-0 halftime deficit to a 21-21 tie at the Coliseum , giving the Trojans their only blemish on an 11-0-1 season . . . . Since 1957 , USC is 28-3-1 against Stanford . . . . The series dates to 1905 . Quarterback Todd Marinovich needs two completions to move into third place on USC 's all-time passing list and 49 to move into second place . . . . USC 's Scott Lockwood leads the Pacific 10 and ranks fifth in the nation with a punt-return average of 20.7 yards . . . . Stanford had been 0-11-1 on the road since 1987 , before winning last week at Notre Dame . Stanford Coach Dennis Green does not anticipate a letdown by his team after last week 's emotional victory over Notre Dame . Watching USC on film sobered the Cardinal , he said . . . . USC Coach Larry Smith , on tight end Yonnie Jackson , who will replace injured Frank Griffin in the starting lineup : `` The best thing he does is block the sweep . He blocks that as well as or better than Frank . ''