Apple Computer executives disclosed Tuesday that the company has fundamentally altered its product strategy , offering three new machines in an effort to become a high-volume , low-priced vendor . Rather than charging premium prices and settling for a small but highly profitable customer base -- a longstanding approach that has drawn increasing criticism from customers and industry analysts -- Apple will cut the cost of its flagship Macintosh computer almost in half in an effort to increase sales volume and bring in a new generation of first-time buyers . `` Apple used to be the computer for everybody , and then it became a machine for the corporate market , '' said Tim Bajarin , executive vice president of Creative Strategies , a personal computer research firm . `` They 're getting back to their basic market . '' The cornerstone of the revamped strategy will be a new line of Macintosh computers to be unveiled Oct. 15 . Although Apple has long been expected to introduce a cheaper Macintosh , the company has gone further than anticipated by introducing three new machines that replace much of its current product line , and altering its basic strategy . Apple 's aggressive move is in part a response to Windows , a new software system that gives the widely used International Business Machines-compatible personal computers many of the easy-to-use features that originally made the Macintosh popular . Analysts say countering Windows is critical if Apple is to remain a major player in the $ 25-billion personal computer industry . And the new strategy , which comes at a time when many computer vendors are slashing prices to spur slow sales , also indicates that Apple has recognized the need for a broader customer base in the escalating war to establish desktop computing standards . `` The basic goal is to gain market share , '' said Apple Chairman and Chief Executive John Sculley , who discussed the new strategy in a breakfast meeting with reporters . `` We are going to take lower margins . We need to get unit growth up . '' Apple , the first company to make the personal computer a mass-market product , has long been fighting a lone battle against the IBM-compatible machines . Those PCs have traditionally used a software system called DOS , developed by Microsoft , to control the basic functions of the machine . The brains behind the systems are microprocessors from Intel . The IBM/DOS/Intel design became a de facto standard in part because the so-called clone makers were able to make the machines cheaply and thus encouraged broad sales . Software developers rushed to write programs for the widely distributed computers , and corporations who wanted standardized products bought them en masse . The Apple Macintosh , introduced in 1984 , was generally considered more powerful and easier to use than the DOS machines and achieved a loyal following despite its high price and the fact that it could not communicate or share information with the IBM-compatible machines . A strategy put in place by Sculley in 1985 to sell the Macintosh to corporate America was more successful than many expected , but the Apple model still claims only about 8 % of the market . Over the past year , Apple 's growth has slowed , and customers have grown increasingly restless with pricing that gave Apple gross margins of more than 50 % . And the DOS standard has begun to fracture : IBM is promoting a replacement for DOS called OS/2 , while Microsoft is pushing Windows , which works on high-end DOS machines . Both OS/2 and Windows emulate many of the Macintosh 's features . In addition , the UNIX operating system , which has traditionally been used only on powerful engineering and scientific computers , is growing increasingly popular on cheaper desktop systems . Sun Microsystems , which has pushed the price of powerful engineering workstations below the $ 10,000 level , is now considered a long-term strategic competitor in personal computers . `` There are three places where people are trying to build something -- Bellevue ( Washington , near Microsoft 's headquarters ) , Mountain View , ( Calif. home of Sun ) and Cupertino ( home of Apple ) , '' said Michael Spindler , the former head of Apple 's European operations who was promoted to chief operating officer earlier this year . `` Everyone else is just peddling . '' Analysts have long speculated that Apple might eventually be forced to license the Macintosh design and operating system -- as IBM/Microsoft and Sun have done . That would allow clone-vendors to make cheap Macintoshes and expand the machine 's base , which would in turn encourage software companies to write programs for it and make it more of a standard . But instead , Apple has chosen to offer cheap machines itself and is counting on its ability to build them as efficiently as any clone-maker could . Sculley and Spindler both emphasized on Tuesday that the company had put a great deal of effort into cutting production costs at its highly automated factories in California , Singapore and Ireland . The new products to be introduced Oct. 15 include an entry-level machine , about equivalent to the current Macintosh SE , that is expected to cost about $ 1,000 in its cheapest version and $ 1,500 with a hard disk drive . The `` street '' prices and prices charged to educational institutions will probably be several hundred dollars lower . A new color Macintosh will be priced at about $ 2,500 , and a second color product -- featuring a faster microprocessor and more expandability -- is expected to cost about $ 4,000 . The prices are about half what one would have to pay for comparable power and speed in the current Macintosh product line . The new products will replace much of Apple 's current low- and mid-range product line , but the company will remain committed to the Mac IIci and the Mac IIfx as its high-performance machines . Apple will not comment on the pricing or characteristics of the new products , though they have already been shown to thousands of computer dealers , software developers and consultants . Sculley said Apple will spend $ 40 million , mostly on advertising , to promote the new line .