What is neutral for black skin ? Fashionable black women are pondering that question as the popularity of the neutral look ( also referred to as `` nude '' or `` naked '' makeup ) continues to increase . For fair skin , neutral immediately conjures up images of taupe , wheat , pale peach , shell-pink -- the kinds of colors that , if not adjusted properly , leave darker-hued women with a disconcertingly ashy look . Fortunately , the beauty industry has recognized that black women are frequent purchasers of cosmetics and beauty regimens , including high-end , prestige lines , and many companies have adjusted their palettes accordingly . So achieving a neutral yellow , brown or black face is not as daunting a goal as it would have been years ago . Some lines offer custom color blending , the ultimate in color matching . Prescriptives , for instance , introduced custom-blended liquid foundation about three years ago and recently added seven foundations in deep shades to give women with darker skin more choice , says company spokeswoman Anne Greenberg . A custom-blended powder was added last year . The 1990 Collection `` is an extension and amplification of one 's natural skin tone . The textures are matte and sheer , so they seem inseparable from one 's own skin , '' Greenberg says . The 1990 colors can be worn by very fair- to very , very brown-skinned women with varying degrees of emphasis ( deepening eye color , for instance ) , depending on the occasion . `` I think that black women are blessed with skin that looks beautiful in a wide range of colors , '' says Andrea Robinson , president of Revlon 's Ultima II , which has just introduced The Nakeds , cosmetics that emphasize the skin 's color and texture . For Robinson , the key to interpreting the nude look for black women is how shade marries with skin tone . The Nakeds ' Brush-On Foundation , now being introduced in Southern California , comes in shades from fairly pale to fairly brown and is not powder -- even though it is carried in a compact . The new foundation enhances rather than masks the skin 's natural color and texture , a plus for women with good skin who are not afraid to show it off . Beverly Hills-based Visage Beaute offers custom-blended everything -- so women with skin from alabaster and caramel to cocoa can come away from its counters with a neutral look precisely appropriate for them . The same polished , unmade-up effect -- nude color for a medium-brown-skinned woman and nude color for a woman with espresso-colored skin -- can be achieved with completely different colors . Mixing cosmetic components , rather than using everything from one line , works better for black women , advises Rudy Calvo , a Los Angeles-based makeup artist who counts actresses Cicely Tyson and Jasmine Guy and pop divas Patti LaBelle and Gladys Knight among his clients . Black women 's deeper hues , Calvo says , `` make color work better than on Caucasian skin ; you can really blend color in for a natural look . '' Calvo 's advice to black women who want to try the nude face : Soft , unfrosted shadows in simple colors are best , and matte lipstick is current and especially flattering on women with full , lush lips . Finally , Calvo admonishes , a more subtle approach to blush makes for an attractive , natural-looking face . `` Too much blush makes you look harder . Concentrate on 'less is best . ' `` Hair and makeup by Jasmine / Celestine-Cloutier ; model , Shae / Nina Blanchard