The bloody uprising in Romania culminating in the execution of longtime leader Nicolae Ceausescu has alarmed China 's hard-line leaders and dimmed hopes for an early relaxation of martial law in Beijing . American and other Western officials have repeatedly advised China that the removal of martial law would be a key step in restoring ties with the West . It would also help President Bush , who has been under fire from Congress for being too soft on China . But diplomats said Thursday that Beijing could not afford to risk removing martial law , imposed more than six months ago , about two weeks before the army smashed its way into the capital to crush mass student-led protest demonstrations . `` The leadership is twitching with fear , '' said a Western diplomat . `` China 's leaders are extremely tense because of Romania . It is much more difficult for them to move ( on martial law ) now . '' Eastern European diplomats agreed . `` I do n't see how they can lift martial law now , '' said an East European envoy . `` They may have to keep it in place until the Asian Games . '' Beijing hosts the games next September . Bush has sent his national security adviser , Brent Scowcroft , to China on two missions to try to repair damage to ties from Beijing 's crackdown on students in June . He has agreed to allow China to launch three U.S.-built satellites and removed a ban on trade credits by the U.S. Export-Import Bank . `` China is aware that Congress is profoundly unhappy with Bush over the Scowcroft missions and that something is expected in return , '' a Western diplomat said . China 's response has been minimal . It has agreed to allow the Voice of America broadcasting service to replace an expelled correspondent in Beijing , and to talk about an academic program . Beijing 's public reaction to the upheaval in Romania has been cautious . It played down the unrest initially , giving its citizens only brief and vague reports , but later reported the execution of Ceausescu , the hard-line Communist president who resisted reforms sweeping Eastern Europe and was one of Beijing 's staunchest allies . Beijing has since congratulated the new leaders and expressed its wishes for continued friendship . Out of the public eye , it has taken a tough position , tightening security at campuses , giving Communist Party members the `` correct '' version of events and accusing Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of ultimately being to blame . China insists that it is different from Romania , distant from Eastern Europe and with a brand of communism that sprang from its own revolution rather than being imposed by a foreign power . But there are many similarities . Like Romania , China used massive force to crush unrest , resulting in heavy casualties . Beijing 's policies are highly unpopular and there is widespread personal dislike for certain members of the leadership .