It 's like an individual retirement account , but in some ways better . It 's one of the few legitimate tax shelters left that you can still pursue this late in the year . And many people who are eligible to have one do n't . It 's a Keogh plan , and if you have self-employment income , you should consider opening one this week if you do n't have one . `` Basically , anybody who has self-employment income should be looking at setting up a Keogh , '' says Edward Rosenson , a tax partner in charge of personal financial planning in the Los Angeles office of the accounting firm Ernst & Young . But many people do n't know about Keoghs because `` the publicity by far is in favor of IRAs . '' Sometimes called Super IRAs , Keoghs are tax-deferred retirement accounts that you can set up if you earn self-employment income such as from your own business , professional practice or from a small sideline activity or hobby . If you work for a big corporation by day but moonlight as a screenwriter , painter , carpenter or other self-employed worker , you can put the income from that self-employment into a Keogh . Keoghs have many of the advantages of IRAs . Contributions are tax-deductible . Earnings accumulate tax deferred until withdrawn , presumably when you retire . Assets can be invested in many of the same instruments allowed in IRAs , such as certificates of deposit , stocks , bonds and mutual funds . Like an IRA , you can set up a Keogh at a bank , brokerage house or mutual fund . You also can roll over lump-sum distributions from your pension plan , 401 ( k ) company savings plan or other qualified retirement plan into your Keogh . But Keoghs have some advantages over IRAs . Among them : * You can put more money into them . In fact , the limits for annual contributions are far higher than the $ 2,000 annual limit on IRA contributions . The exact amount depends on which type of Keogh you choose . In a `` profit sharing '' Keogh -- the most flexible type -- you can decide each year whether to contribute and how much , up to 15 % of your net profit from your self-employment activity , to a maximum of $ 30,000 . In a `` money purchase '' Keogh , you can contribute a fixed percentage of self-employment earnings each year , up to a maximum of 25 % , or $ 30,000 . But you must contribute this same amount every year , unless your business shows a loss . You can also choose a `` paired '' plan that has features of both profit sharing and money purchase plans . You choose the percentage that you contribute annually to the money purchase portion , and then you can contribute to the profit sharing portion . The total can go up to 25 % . There also are `` defined benefit '' Keoghs in which you can contribute even more . You 'll need a professional , such as an actuary or accountant , to tell you how much , according to Michael Shuler , a public affairs specialist with the Internal Revenue Service in Los Angeles . * You have more flexibility on when to contribute . Like an IRA , you must set up your Keogh by Dec. 31 of the year you will claim deductions for your contribution . But you can wait until you file -- April 15 or even later if you get an extension -- before actually making the contribution deductible for the previous tax year . With an IRA , your deadline is April 15 , regardless of whether you file for an extension . * You can save taxes upon withdrawal . Money you withdraw from an IRA after age 59 1/2 is generally taxed at your regular rate . But if you have contributed for at least five years to a Keogh , were at least 50 years old in 1986 and take your money out of your Keogh in a lump sum after age 59 1/2 , you may be able to use a special five-year averaging procedure . In effect , this allows you to treat the account as if you withdrew the money in equal , smaller amounts stretched over five years . That 's going to lower your tax . Because of these advantages , if you are leaving a company , consider rolling over your company pension or 401 ( k ) money into a Keogh instead of an IRA . Another advantage to Keoghs : You can have one and still keep your IRA . And even if you are not eligible for a deductible IRA contribution -- because you already have a pension plan through your employer and exceed certain income limits -- you can still make deductible contributions into a Keogh . Also , although you must start withdrawing from your Keogh at age 70 1/2 -- just like with an IRA -- you still can keep contributing after that age as long as you continue to earn self-employment income . IRA contributions are no longer allowed after that point . Of course , not all is a picnic with Keoghs . There are some drawbacks . To set up a Keogh , you 'll need some advice from an accountant , attorney or other expert . The process is much more complicated than with an IRA ; a lot more paper work is involved . And there are a lot more rules governing how often and how much you must contribute . Also , if you have employees who work for you in your self-employment business , you must include them in your Keogh , which in effect becomes your business 's pension plan . The Keogh is subject to various rules , including provisions preventing you as owner from benefiting disproportionately compared to your employees .