QUESTION : I should replace my old heat pump before winter . What are the newest and highest-efficiency heat pump designs ( for both heating and air conditioning ) available ? ANSWER : There are several new designs of super-high-efficiency heat pumps that can reduce your annual utility costs by many hundreds of dollars . These new heat pumps may also be a cost-effective option for homes with natural gas furnaces and central air conditioners . A heat pump works both as a furnace and an air conditioner . The heating efficiency is rated by co-efficient of performance ( COP ) and the cooling efficiency by SEER , like central air conditioners . Some new super-high-efficiency heat pumps have a maximum COP higher than three . This means that you get more than three dollars worth of heat for each dollar you pay the electric company . Cooling SEER 's are as high as 12 . You can get indoor units designed to be located in a utility room , crawl space , or attic . One new high-efficiency heat pump design uses a two-speed compressor . When your heating or air conditioning needs are low to moderate , which is the majority of the time , the compressor runs at a lower speed . Therefore , the unit runs longer at a lower electrical usage rate . It does not cycle on and off as often as with a typical single-speed compressor . This reduces inefficiencies and greatly increases your comfort by providing even and continuous heat . In the summer , improved comfort is even more dramatic because continuous and slower operation dehumidifies the air better . You can get an optional kit to lower the indoor blower speed too for even better comfort . A further efficiency and comfort improvement is provided by a new , totally variable-speed compressor design . Sophisticated microprocessors determine the ideal speed for both the compressor and indoor blower to run . In effect , the heat pump capacity is always sized perfectly to provide reduced heating and cooling costs and optimum comfort . A geothermal heat pump design provides the lowest operating costs . These use the earth as a source for heat instead of the outdoor air . Since the temperature of the ground stays warmer in the winter and cooler in the summer than the outdoor air , the efficiency remains very high year-round . If you have a gas furnace and have to replace your central air conditioner , depending on your local utility rates , a high-efficiency heat pump may be a viable option . During mild fall and spring weather , it may be less expensive to operate a high-efficiency heat pump than an old gas furnace . You can write to me for Utility Bills Update No . 391 showing a list of manufacturers , model numbers , and efficiency ratings for these new designs of super-high-efficiency heat pumps . Please include $ 1 and a self-addressed business-sized envelope . Send your requests to James Dulley , c/o Los Angeles Times , 6906 Royalgreen Drive , Cincinnati , Ohio 45244 . Correct Window Size for Side Facing North Q : I 'm converting my utility room to a study and plan to add a window . Since it is on the north side , should I install a very small one ? A : You are correct that you should minimize the amount of window area on the north side of your house . The coldest winter winds come from the north and the winter sun never shines in . First check your local building codes . Most require a minimum size since it may be needed for an emergency exit . A minimum opening height or width of 18 inches and minimum opening area of 4 square feet is common .