A bid by the Australian concern Qintex to develop a major seaside resort in Dana Point appears to have failed after the financially troubled company said Thursday that it would not complete purchase of a key 115-acre tract . Qintex said in July that it would build a $ 1-billion resort on the property , known as the Headlands , and another nearby tract in the small southern Orange County beach town . The two properties are among the last large undeveloped sites on Southern California 's coast . The decision not to buy the highly prized property comes in the wake of several other setbacks for Qintex , including its recent failure to complete the acquisition of the MGM/UA film studios . That $ 1.5-billion deal fell through when Qintex could not complete the financing . Those problems also appear to be behind the company 's decision not to acquire the Headlands parcel . A company source said Qintex 's Australian lenders refused to advance more money for the Dana Point resort project pending a review of the company 's financial status . Qintex 's action disappointed Dana Point officials , who learned about the collapse of the land deal from company officials late Thursday . The city , which was formed Jan. 1 , was anticipating that the project would soon generate millions of dollars in tax revenues . `` We 're watching this with a great deal of interest , '' said Mayor Eileen Krause , who was attending the dedication of Dana Point 's new city hall . `` It would be nice to know what 's going to happen . But obviously we will have to deal with a change of players . '' Qintex agreed earlier this year to buy the Headlands property for $ 115 million . But Qintex took an option on the land that did not require most of the purchase price be paid until 1991 , by which time the owner was to have obtained permission from Dana Point to build on the land . By missing a $ 3-million installment payment on the Headlands property , Qintex loses its claim on one of the choicest pieces of real estate in Southern California . It also loses an additional $ 12 million it had already paid Chandler-Sherman Corp. , the owner of the property . Company spokesmen could not be reached for comment . Qintex said in a terse release that it would `` continue to maintain '' ownership of the other Dana Point property , at Monarch Beach , on which the purchase was completed last summer . The company also said it would continue to operate a tennis and golf club there . Company officials in Los Angeles and in Brisbane , Australia , did not return phone calls seeking additional comment . But Qintex said earlier that the resort would be hard-pressed to succeed if it did n't encompass both properties , which are less than a mile apart , and local developers familiar with the project agree . The company had planned to build a posh hotel and expensive houses and condominiums , all overlooking the Pacific Ocean , on the properties . A source familiar with the company said it was `` far less likely '' now that Qintex would develop the resort at all . A more likely scenario , he said , was that the company would sell the Monarch Beach land to raise cash . Qintex paid $ 132 million for the 232-acre Monarch Beach parcel , acquired from Hawaii hotel developer Hemmeter Corp. and local developer Stein-Brief Group . The two owners had paid only $ 32 million for the land less than two years earlier , fueling speculation that the Australian concern had overpaid and did n't understand how costly and time-consuming development in Southern California can be . Stein-Brief and Hemmeter had already spent months getting permission for an elaborate 1,100-room resort modeled after Hearst Castle . Qintex announced that it would probably change the Hemmeter plans and build a smaller resort more akin to the exclusive Ritz-Carlton nearby . That in turn worried local officials , who were concerned that the smaller hotel might bring in less tax revenue . They also worried about Qintex 's other plans . In order to bring in some money while the hotel was getting on its feet , Qintex was likely to ask permission to build and sell houses nearby . The land , however , came with permission to build only a hotel , and local officials opposed building houses because they said it might aggravate traffic . Mayor Krause said the Qintex proposal seemed the best use of the land . She also said the City Council will look strictly at future proposals to make sure that they are resort-oriented and that they minimize traffic concerns . Dana Point City Manager William O. Talley said it is too early to gauge the effect of Qintex 's action on the city . `` It would be foolish to speculate on the impact of this , '' he said . `` The city is not in any position to control the events . '' If Qintex also sells the Monarch Beach property , it is likely to be bought by Japanese interests , sources said . When Qintex was again overburdened with debt earlier this year , it sold half its interest in three resorts -- two in Australia and one in Hawaii -- for $ 350 million to two Japanese companies , Mitsui & Co. and Nippon Shinpan Co. Last week , when Qintex announced that it was selling the rest of its interest in those resorts as part of a major restructuring , stock analysts said it was likely that Mitsui , Nippon and perhaps other Japanese companies would be among the bidders . The Japanese are avid investors in resorts . Whether the Dana Point property is sold depends largely on how soon Qintex can sell its other three resorts and what it can get for them , according to one source . Mitsui and Nippon are already familiar with the Dana Point properties , since as part of their March deal to buy Qintex 's resorts they got first crack at becoming partners with Qintex in the Dana Point resort . They have been talking to Qintex about investing in Dana Point for months , a source said . The development announced Thursday was the latest in a series of mishaps that have tarnished Qintex 's once golden image . A U.S. subsidiary , Qintex Entertainment Inc. , recently filed for bankruptcy when it failed to meet a $ 5.9-million payment to MCA Inc. Times staff writer James M. Gomez contributed to this story .