On Dec. 23 , 1969 , the Balboa Cinema audience for the first Orange County engagement of the infamous adult film `` I Am Curious ( Yellow ) '' included Municipal Judge J.E.T . ( Ned ) Rutter , representatives of the district attorney 's office and Newport Beach police . Not coincidentally , the run stopped there . A sizable crowd for the aborted second daily screening at the Newport Beach movie house was turned away after police seized the print . The next day , the scene was replayed at the Stanton Theater ( now Teatro Stanton , a Spanish-language cinema ) . Thus officials in Orange County joined a growing number in municipalities around the country striking out at the then-controversial Swedish film , which brought a new level of sexual explicitness to mainstream movie houses -- and became an unprecedented film phenomenon in the process . In Houston , a theater showing the film mysteriously burned to the ground . The film was banned in Denver , Phoenix and the entire state of Kansas . Although the film had been playing in Los Angeles since May , on Dec. 31 , 1969 , vice squads raided six city theaters and seized copies of the film . When and where the film did get to play , it drew record crowds because the curious -- most of whom presumably would n't be caught dead at a traditional skin flick -- were able to rationalize seeing a sexually explicit film that claimed artistic intentions . `` The message of the movie , '' wrote Times film critic Charles Champlin at the time , `` is that there is evidently nothing the movies can not show and tell an adult audience : a general , not a fetishist or lonely-old-man audience . '' For his own part , Champlin acknowledged the film as a `` social phenomenon '' but found it `` very tedious indeed and not as incisive as ( director Vilgot ) Sjoman hoped it might be . '' Linda Williams , a UC Irvine film studies professor , writes in her newly published history of film pornography that `` legitimate , but often not very respectable , movie houses '' that showed `` I Am Curious ( Yellow ) '' and similar exploitation fare `` became the testing ground and , ultimately , the outlet for hard-core material once exclusive to the illegal stags . '' The Balboa followed that pattern , spending some time in the '70s as an X-rated Pussycat Theater before being transformed into a repertory theater and later specializing in foreign and art films under the ownership of Landmark Theatres . The Balboa has no special plans to mark the anniversary of the `` I Am Curious ( Yellow ) '' raid , theater officials said . RICK VANDERKNYFF