On its first series Friday night , El Toro High School moved quickly down the field against Villa Park . The Chargers ' passing clicked and their running picked up one sizable gain after another . El Toro drove 68 yards in seven plays to score on a 21-yard run by Bo Haley with 8 minutes 46 seconds left in the first quarter . Then came the great drought . For the next 24:56 , El Toro could n't score . And the second-seeded Chargers seemed headed for an upsetting loss to Villa Park in a Southern Section Division III second-round playoff game . But a 21-point , fourth-quarter rally helped El Toro pull out a 28-14 victory before 4,000 at Mission Viejo High . El Toro ( 11-1 ) advances to play Mission Viejo , a 34-6 winner over Dominguez , in the semifinals Saturday . Villa Park ends its season 8-4 . `` I was worried until the gun sounded , '' El Toro Coach Bob Johnson said . `` Villa Park played us hard . We were out of sync and it was because of the way they played us . '' After taking that 7-0 early lead , it all when downhill quickly for El Toro . On the first play of the Chargers ' next possession , quarterback Steve Stenstrom threw a screen pass into the mitts of Villa Park linebacker Craig Moresco , who went 37 yards untouched for a touchdown . Villa Park took a 14-7 lead after quarterback Jason Martian ran three yards around left end on a third-and-goal play . Martian appeared trapped by defensive back Mike Miller , but fooled him with a quick move to the outside . The score was set up by a bad snap on a punt that gave Villa Park a first down at the El Toro 20 . Said Johnson : `` You make your own breaks and we did n't make any . '' Well , at least not for themselves . The problems continued in the third quarter . Running back Danny Maestas was stopped at the one-yard line on a fourth and goal , ending El Toro 's only possession in the quarter . Villa Park was having its own troubles . The Spartans could n't move the ball either and as the fourth quarter started they still led , 14-7 . El Toro finally tied the score on its first drive of the fourth quarter . Maestas scooted five yards around left end for the touchdown with 7:50 left . Then it all fell apart for Villa Park . Gary Bladow , who gained 89 yards in 12 carries , fumbled the ensuing kickoff and Brian Haas recovered for El Toro at the Villa Park 24 . Jerome Oakman , who gained 145 yards in 17 carries , score on the first play as El Toro took the lead for good . Maestas then added a 14-yard touchdown run with 2:46 left . `` The way they run and pass , it 's hard to stop both , '' said Villa Park Coach Pat Mahoney , whose team held El Toro in check for an awful long time . `` After that first-quarter touchdown we did n't have much going for us for 2 1/2 quarters , '' Johnson said . `` It was scary . ''