For many of us , some of the happiest Christmas memories happened at the movies . Video makes it possible to relive those golden moments : Bing Crosby singing `` White Christmas , '' Edmund Gwenn showing us there really is a Santa Claus , Jimmy Stewart standing by a tree discovering the gift of life , Jean Shepherd reminding us what it was like to be young the night before Christmas , Dickens ' Scrooge come to life . Crosby introduced `` White Christmas '' in one of the best holiday musicals ever created on film : Holiday Inn ( MCA tape and laser Encore Edition video disc ) . Irving Berlin crowded the 1942 black-and-white film with one song after another , each memorializing a holiday . Crosby and Fred Astaire ( or both ) sing ( or dance to ) them and it 's a sure-fire way to start the holidays right . Crosby sang the Yuletide classic again in White Christmas , a 1954 Berlin songfest with Danny Kaye , Rosemary Clooney and Vera-Ellen ( Paramount tape and disc ) . A tiresome plot almost swamps the typically merry Berlin score-the patter-song `` Sisters , '' still another version of `` Blue Skies '' and the indestructible title song . Miracle on 34th Street ( Playhouse Home Video tape and disc ) is the 1947 classic featuring Gwenn as Kris Kringle , a department store Santa who just may be the real thing . The way he goes about convincing everyone ( especially the little girl who steals the film , Natalie Wood ) that he 's the great Mr. Claus is great fun . Skip the colorized version ; everyone looks anemic , like early Polaroid snapshots left out in the sun . For most of us , even a colorized Gwenn is Santa , not the imposter in Santa Claus : The Movie ( Media Entertainment tape ; Image Entertainment laser video disc ) . Not that David Huddleston does n't look the part ( his first sleigh ride at the beginning is impressive ) . But even Dudley Moore as a fallen elf and John Lithgow , as an unscrupulous toy manufacturer , ca n't save the picture . A Christmas Story ( MGM/UA tape and disc ) is one of the funniest films ever made . Humorist Jean Shepherd 's reminiscences about growing up in the late 1940s revolves around young Shepherd 's gift of his dreams for Christmas : A Red Ryder Carbine Action 2OO-Shot Lightning Loader Range Model Air Rifle ( a BB gun ) . Peter Billingsley plays Shepherd as a boy and Shepherd himself narrates . Pure joy . Many memorable films have special Christmas celebrations . Few film endings will match the emotion of the Christmas ending in Frank Capra 's 1946 heartwarmer It 's a Wonderful Life ( Be careful . The tape is in the public domain and many of the video prints are terrible . Recommended : Republic tape and disc , or the special edition on Criterion laser disc ) . Stewart is the small-town businessman facing ruin on Christmas Eve . The ending is pure movie magic . Skip the Hal Roach Studio 's `` colorized '' print . It makes everyone look embalmed on a series of tinted postcards . The Christmas sequence in Meet Me in St. Louis ( MGM/UA tape and disc ) is the highlight of this lovely family musical . When Judy Garland sings `` Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas '' to Margaret O'Brien , there is n't a dry eye in the house . Rosalind Russell storms through an unforgettable Christmas celebration in Auntie Mame ( Warner tape and dasc ) , and the musical featuring Lucille Ball ( Mame , Warner tape and disc ) has Jerry Herman 's underrated song `` We Need a Little Christmas , '' a neat populist summary of why everyone loves the season . When it comes to Christmas stories , none will ever match Dickens ' A Christmas Carol and you can now own two of the best versions ever on film . The 1951 black-and-white film starring Alastair Sim as Scrooge is the 86-minute British version that sets the standard ( United ) . Surprisingly good is the 1938 production featuring Reginald Owen as Scrooge ( MGM/UA tape and disc ) . Scrooge , a happy musical adaptation , was made in 1970 with an all-star cast including Albert Finney out- rageously good in the title role and no less than Alec Guinness as Marley 's Ghost ( CBS/Fox tape and disc ) . Other films with a Yuletide theme : Christmas Lilies of the Field ( MPI Home Video tape ) , a made-for-television sequel to the original `` Lilies of the Field , '' featuring Billy Dee Williams in Sidney Poitier 's Academy Award-winning role . A Christmas to Remember ( Vestron tape ) is another made-for-TV movie with a superior cast including Jason Robards , Eva Marie Saint and Joanne Woodward . It 's the story of a city boy who joins his grandparents in the country for the holiday and learns the real meaning of Christmas . For TV fans , there 's Christmas Television Classics ( Shokus tape ) . This video compilation features four 30-minute , black-and-white TV shows from the 1950s , including `` The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet '' ( Rick sings `` Christmas Song '' ) and `` Make Room for Daddy '' ( Danny Thomas is stranded out of town on Christmas Eve ) . If you 're tired of Hollywood 's interpretation of the Christmas message , you might try The Christmas Collection ( Vanguard Video , two hours ) of five films , including `` Glory in the Highest , '' a drama about the birth of Christ , and `` God 's Christmas Gift '' in which a girl finds the true meaning of Christmas .