Don we now our gay apparel : our socks that light up like Christmas trees , our musical neckties that play `` Jingle Bells , '' our boxer shorts festooned with reindeer . This season everybody 's getting decked out for the holidays . Young or old , male or female , people are dressing from head to toe in Yuletide attire . Even stuffy executives have succumbed to the holiday spirit . The Tie Rack in MainPlace , Santa Ana , had one customer swear off musical ties after his started playing Christmas carols during an annual meeting with 800 other executives . `` He was sitting in the front row and he could n't get the thing to shut off , '' says Ziva Adams , manager of the Tie Rack . `` They tried dunking the tie in a glass of water but that only made it play louder . '' With each passing Christmas , the amount of seasonal garb has grown . At Nordstrom , men can choose from braces adorned with angels and Christmas trees , ties with Victorian scenes of old St. Nick , and socks with skiing Santas and reindeer . Some of these novelties do not come cheap -- the suspenders cost $ 110 and the hand-sewn silk ties about $ 35 . Yet shoppers merrily snap them up . `` They 're fun and they can be worn year after year , '' says Lenora Giovino , wardrobe consultant for Nordstrom in MainPlace . `` Men are just going crazy over this stuff . '' Some bosses wear festive garments to show their employees they 're more like Santa Claus than Scrooge . One Nordstrom customer , a company vice president , showed up at his office wearing red corduroy pants covered with green Christmas trees , a shirt with bright candy cane stripes , suspenders and Santa socks . `` He blew his staff away , '' Giovino says . `` He 's a very strait-laced guy . '' Giovino 's husband has worn his holiday suspenders to two Christmas galas this year . `` He 's been the hit of the party , '' she says . Dressing up like elves is a way for people to spread holiday cheer . Yet behind the frivolity lies a serious desire on the part of many to find relief from a world they might find hard or threatening , Giovino says . `` This is n't threatening , '' she says . `` The world is such a hard place . This cheers people up . '' Nordstrom also has battery-operated socks and mittens with light bulbs that actually work and colorful hand-knit sweaters for women trimmed with Christmas trees , snowmen , reindeer , bows and wreaths . `` This will be fun to wear to a party , '' says Beth Southern of Villa Park , a young woman admiring one of the holiday cardigans . `` It 's different from your ordinary red sweater or green turtleneck . And it 's always in style . '' Technology has added to the variety of novelty merchandise . The Sock Market in MainPlace has an array of socks adorned with wreaths , Santas and candy canes that light up and play Christmas carols , thanks to tiny batteries and microchips . Computer-generated patterns allow sock and sweater manufacturers to weave intricate holiday designs into their garments . Oshkosh has tiny stockings for infants and children decorated with detailed pictures of trains , toy soldiers and Christmas mice for $ 4.75 . `` Today it 's all done on computer , whereas years ago they used to have to do it by hand , '' says Connie Gualiano , manager of The Sock Market . Where handmade socks would cost about $ 35 , machine-made ones sell for about $ 3 to $ 15 . Thanks to colorful graphics , socks are no longer utilitarian but a key fashion accessory . `` Customers constantly call us before the holidays to see if we have our Christmas hosiery in , '' Gualiano says . Men who never strayed from black , brown or navy socks will now sport red and green stockings with bells and lights . For conservative Kris Kringles there are more restrained holiday styles , such as black socks with just a sprig of holly along the sides or gray socks with a single black-and-white-striped Christmas ornament . Men and women are buying boxer shorts adorned with Christmas mice , polar bears and hippo Santas for $ 12.99 at the Tie Rack . Young women wear them on the outside , while Adams has sold them to businessmen to wear underneath their suits . The Tie Rack also stocks tuneful ties that play `` Jingle Bells '' and sell for $ 15.99 . This season 's most popular style shows Santa lounging in a hammock under a palm tree . `` It 's an excuse to be silly , '' Adams says . Kiosks stationed throughout Fashion Island in Newport Beach stock unusual seasonal merchandise . For baby , there are rompers , tennis shoes , sweat shirts and hair bows hand-painted with Christmas themes . Jamaica Me Crazy carries rubber bolos featuring Christmas cacti and Santas , with coordinating earrings and bracelets . The Sporting Life , a women 's boutique in Fashion Island , has earrings strewn with miniature Christmas lights , necklaces strung with jingle bells and red chili peppers , red and green metallic shoelaces and Christmas sweaters with snowmen , trees or sequined ornaments . `` We do really well with our novelty . People want to wear something frivolous , '' says Linda Recko , manager of the Sporting Life . `` People 's happiest memories are of the holidays . They 're trying to recapture those simpler , childish times . ''