Danny Maestas scored on a four-yard run in overtime and then intercepted a pass on the final play of the game to give El Toro High School a 28-21 victory over Mission Viejo Friday night in front of 6,200 in Orange Coast College 's LeBard Stadium . El Toro ( 12-1 ) advances to the Division III championship game next Saturday against defending champion Paramount , trying to win its fourth Southern Section championship in the 1980s . Mission Viejo ( 10-3 ) lost in the semifinals for the third consecutive year and the second time in overtime . It was also the Diablos ' second loss of the year to El Toro . The teams were tied , 21-21 , at the end of regulation and the outcome was decided by the California Tiebreaker , in which each team is given four plays to try to score from the 10-yard line . El Toro lost the coin toss and had first possession . A pass interference call on El Toro 's second play gave the Chargers a first down at Mission Viejo 's four-yard line and Maestas scored off left tackle on the next play . Ken Romaniszyn 's extra-point kick pushed El Toro ahead , 28-21 , and now it was Mission Viejo 's turn to try to score . Mission Viejo quarterback Tim Snowden , who played brilliantly most of the night , had trouble finding open receivers in the ensuing series . Snowden threw three incomplete passes and then was intercepted on his final attempt by Maestas . El Toro had lost an overtime game to Santa Ana in the opening round of the playoffs last year and was defeated by Aviation in overtime in 1979 . For Mission Viejo , the loss brought back bitter memories of a 7-6 overtime loss to Los Alamitos two years ago in the semifinals , where placekicker Eric Ekdahl missed an extra-point attempt when his kicking shoe filled with mud on a sloppy field . Mission Viejo 's defense dominated play for 30 minutes before El Toro came alive midway through the third quarter . Steve Stenstrom , considered by many to be the top quarterback in the county , was held to only 17 yards passing in the first half as Mission Viejo built a 13-0 lead . Stenstrom was continually pressured into poor passes and was sacked six times . But he managed to throw two touchdown passes -- a 57-yarder to tight end Bo Haley and a looping 19-yarder to wide receiver Rob Johnson -- that finally got El Toro going . Snowden , overshadowed by Stenstrom and Capistrano Valley 's Tony Solliday all season , passed for 252 yards , including 189 yards in the first half . Mission Viejo appeared to be in control with 10:46 remaining to play when tailback Mark Gaw scored on a one-yard run on fourth down for a 21-14 lead , but Stenstrom rallied El Toro . There were two big pass plays in El Toro 's rally to tie the score . First , Stenstrom teamed with Johnson on a 25-yard play and then he lofted a high spiral in the left corner of the end zone that Johnson managed to catch despite double coverage . Mission Viejo was hurt by 145 yards in penalties , including a critical holding and pass interference call against defensive back Bill Denny . But Denny also had a pass interception in the fourth quarter that set up Gaw 's touchdown run . Mission Viejo intercepted Stenstrom twice and kept him off balance all evening . Stenstrom completed 12 of 18 passes for 172 yards .