In April , 1980 , eight U.S. helicopters took off from the aircraft carrier Nimitz in the Arabian Sea on a mission to rescue 52 American hostages in Iran . The mission , planned and rehearsed in excruciating detail , seemed fail-safe . But reality was unkind to the U.S. rescue team . Although the choppers worked well enough in the United States , they could n't handle conditions in the desert . Two of the helicopters never reached the remote staging area 200 miles from Tehran . A third developed hydraulic problems and could n't continue the mission . The rescue effort was called off because there were n't enough remaining choppers to do the job . The mission , code-named Desert One , ended in disaster when a helicopter and a C-130 transport crashed as the commandos fled the landing zone , killing eight servicemen . Today , the failure of Desert One stands as testament that the best-laid battle plans of policy-makers and generals often can go wrong . That lesson looms today in the U.S. troop deployment in Saudi Arabia . The U.S. contingent includes nearly 200,000 troops and an impressive array of weapons systems : M1-A1 tanks and multiple rocket launchers , cruise missiles and laser-guided bombs , Stealth fighters and radar-seeking rockets . But in the remorseless arithmetic of the battlefield , there are serious questions whether U.S. forces have enough of what they need -- and whether their equipment actually will do what it is assigned to do . To begin with , while U.S. weapons are technologically advanced , analysts fret that commanders may not always have enough reliable weapons to counter Iraq 's estimated 5,500 battle-tested heavy tanks , thousands of artillery tubes and scores of ballistic missiles . Then , too , the U.S. combat force in the desert lacks experience in war . And armies in combat learn quickly that campaigns seldom go as planned , weapons seldom work as advertised and men rarely perform as trained . Plans go out the window when the first shot is fired , Gen. Colin L. Powell , chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , noted in describing the first hours of the Panama operation last winter . `` Even in tested armies , things go wrong when combat commences , '' said Arizona 's Sen. John McCain , a former Navy pilot shot down over North Vietnam in 1967 . `` With an untested army , you can count on it . '' There are these anomalies : * If shooting starts in Saudi Arabia , the Army will rely heavily on the tank-killing capabilities of the Apache helicopter , the newest and most lethal chopper in the U.S. inventory . But the Apache has proven to be a highly temperamental bird , failing many of the Army 's own standards for reliability . The Army expects to fly the complex helicopter four hours a day in combat . But under the far less rigorous conditions of peacetime training , Apaches break down and require major maintenance every 2 1/2 hours , according to a congressional report released last week . At any given time , only half of the Army 's Apache fleet is capable of carrying out its job , far below the Army 's 70 % `` mission-capable '' goal , Congress ' General Accounting Office found . In what could stand as a stark warning to U.S. commanders in Saudi Arabia , the GAO wrote : `` Given that the Apache has not been able to attain availability goals in peacetime despite favorable conditions , it is questionable whether it can meet the far more strenuous demands of high-intensity combat . '' * Even in a relatively benign training environment , some of America 's most advanced weapons -- including the M1-A1 tank and the Apache -- fail with alarming frequency . The M1-A1 tank , flagship of U.S. armor and a mainstay of the desert deployment , breaks down during exercises after an average of only 152 miles . The tank experiences some system failure -- electronic or mechanical -- every 21 minutes . The Army 's standards are 320 miles and 101 minutes between failure . * High-technology systems such as the Navy 's Aegis-class guided-missile cruiser and the F-117 Stealth fighter have sometimes proven too complex for their human operators in the real world of combat . The crew of the cruiser Vincennes shot down an Iranian jetliner in 1988 because of chaos in the computerized combat information center . A Stealth fighter missed its target in Panama last December by 160 yards after pilots became confused over their orders and the wind changed direction . These errors were caused not by inherent mechanical flaws in the systems , which the Pentagon and the weapons-makers staunchly defend , but because of human error compounded by the stress of battle . `` The F-117 's performance in Panama left it open to question , '' says Bill Arkin , a military critic at the environmental group Greenpeace . He noted that a system as complicated as a state-of-the-art jet fighter or a computerized missile cruiser can overwhelm its human operators , regardless of the machine 's theoretical capabilities . `` While it may work well in computer simulations , in the lab , in conditions at training at Nellis ( Air Force Base in Nevada ) on a sunny day when the guy 's had a good night 's sleep , the people factor in a real war is very different , '' Arkin said . The Vincennes incident also dramatized the problems of discriminating between civilian and military targets and between friendly and hostile forces . With more than two dozen allied armies contemplating joint action against Iraq , and with many of the same weapons in use by both sides , the potential for catastrophic error on the battlefield is magnified , experts said . * The Pentagon has also deployed a variety of weapons that have never been tested in combat , including a raft of electronic warfare systems and the Army 's most advanced antiaircraft and antimissile weapon , the Patriot surface-to-air interceptor . But even if the Patriot works as well in Saudi Arabia as it does at the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico , so few have been deployed that commanders worry about their ability to defend critical installations , including oil fields , air bases and troop encampments . The 19th-Century Prussian general and writer on military strategy , Karl von Clausewitz , called the snafu phenomenon `` friction '' -- the tendency in combat for everything possible to go awry . Contemporary military strategist Edward N. Luttwak noted , `` The chief reason why armies experience problems -- sometimes severe problems , occasionally crippling problems -- at the outset of a war is that in designing their forces , they have underestimated or overlooked the effects of friction . Friction is hard to estimate . It 's not a single obstacle . But in wartime , a thousand little things go wrong . '' To be sure , American commanders have a more than ample supply of certitude that their men and their machines will prevail against the forces of Iraqi President Saddam Hussein . `` If he dares , if he dares come across that border and come down here , I 'm completely confident that we 're going to kick his butt , '' says U.S. Mideast commander Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf . Air Force generals speculate that the Iraqi air force and air defenses can be crushed in a matter of hours . A Marine Corps officer recently promised Iraqi forces `` the most violent five minutes '' they have ever experienced . Like most of their weapons , the vast majority of U.S. troops in the region have never experienced combat . Recent military experiences , from the botched Iran hostage rescue mission in 1980 to the successful but less-than-perfect Panama invasion last December , ought to provide a sobering reminder to U.S. generals that war is inherently an unpredictable enterprise . Superior tactics , training and technology do not always guarantee success , as the United States learned to its sorrow in Vietnam . `` Although I have confidence in the ability of our forces to ultimately prevail militarily , I do n't believe it will be as easy as some envision , '' said McCain . `` I worry about what appears to be some commanders ' overconfidence , because overconfidence leads to error . '' He noted that U.S. war planners and politicians consistently underestimated North Vietnam 's capabilities and tenacity . `` There was a total misplaced confidence in ability of our tactical air power to have impact on the North Vietnamese ability to wage war , '' McCain said . He warned that U.S. military leaders should be wary of underestimating Iraq 's capacity to withstand the pain of U.S. aerial bombardment . Clausewitz noted that warfare was not a technical exercise against a static entity , but rather an application of will upon `` an animate object that reacts . '' And animate objects often react in unpredictable ways . `` We frequently misjudge the enemy -- we misjudged Ho Chi Minh and the North Vietnamese , '' said Fred S. Hoffman , a former senior Pentagon spokesman . `` What ( former Defense Secretary Robert S. ) McNamara thought was logical was n't logical to the enemy . We may be doing the same in the Middle East . '' And it 's not only the enemy that reacts in unpredictable or illogical ways . More battles have been lost to blunder than to superior firepower or strategy , military analysts noted . Military historian Harry G. Summers , a retired Army infantry colonel , cited the first battle of the Somme in World War I , when British Gen. Henry Rawlinson erred in believing that he could level German positions with a massive artillery barrage and not have to fight his way through them . He was wrong . On the day of the attack , the British forces lost 19,240 men in action . Rawlinson 's miscalculation , Summers noted , was the same error underlying former Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. Michael J. Dugan 's faith that air power alone can be decisive against Iraq 's huge and well-entrenched army . BACKGROUND Karl von Clausewitz , who was born in 1780 and fought with the Prussian army in all of the campaigns against Napoleon in the early 19th Century , is considered one of the greatest war strategists . After leaving the army , he devoted much of his time to writing about the military . His best-known work is `` On War , '' which embodies his theories and doctrines and is often quoted , even by his critics . It is a book that has cast an indelible stamp on all subsequent military thought . Although Clausewitz believed that he had discovered the fundamental laws of war , he insisted that in practice these are always subject to an almost infinite number of external influences that often lead to disastrous results on the battlefield .