Orange County commuters of the 1990s will have more transportation options , including a gleaming monorail , trolleys , a high-speed train , toll roads and special freeway ramps reserved for buses and car pools , say traffic planners . Moreover , `` smart streets '' and `` smart corridors '' will become commuter buzzwords as traffic flow is turned over to control centers with computers utilizing artificial intelligence to analyze delays , recommend solutions and fine-tune signal timing on surface streets near clogged freeways . But despite the high-tech wizardry , the next decade will still be dominated by the solo driver wrapped in the chrome , steel and glass of the private automobile , frustrating most efforts to relieve traffic congestion , these same experts add . Indeed , traffic planners say , the 1990s will see average rush-hour freeway speeds drop from the current 25 m.p.h . to 18-20 m.p.h . Says Joe El-Harake , Caltrans ' director of special projects : `` One hour of delay ( stop-and-go traffic ) today will become three hours by 1999 . '' Almost unanimously , respondents to an informal Times mail survey agreed that traffic will still be the Orange County 's worst problem . Even law enforcement officials interested in building more jails listed traffic congestion as the decade 's biggest challenge . The county 's internal growth alone adds more than 60,000 vehicles each year to Orange County streets and freeways . County residents already spend more time in traffic delays than their counterparts in Los Angeles , according to a regional study . Some relief , however , is on the way , based on these predictions -- and working plans -- of transportation experts : * A monorail will link John Wayne Airport with a privately owned office complex across the street . The line probably will be extended to the Amtrak station in the Irvine Spectrum area and link up with monorails now being considered by five Orange County cities . * A privately owned , 300-m.p.h . magnetically levitated super-speed train will link Anaheim with Las Vegas , serving as a land ferry for Inland Empire residents commuting to job-rich Orange County . The train 's Anaheim terminal , near Anaheim Stadium , is expected to become a major rail hub with connections to Amtrak and local commuter trains . * More than 65 miles of publicly owned tollways in southern and eastern Orange County will be open by 1997 . Frequent users will deposit money in advance into a special account that can be debited directly , with electronic scanners reading coded windshield tags for vehicle owner identification . It may also be possible to debit credit cards . * An extension of the Orange Freeway along the Santa Ana River may be built as a private toll road . * High-tech traffic-control centers will monitor traffic flow with a combination of buried pavement sensors , closed-circuit TV cameras , radar and possibly satellite reconnaissance , with computers then able to recommend solutions to traffic jams and adjust signal timing on freeway ramps and surface streets . * Although there is talk of building a new regional airport , it wo n't be ready for 15 to 20 years , increasing pressure on John Wayne Airport 's new passenger terminal , scheduled to open in September , 1990 . Airlines serving John Wayne may begin offering flights to Washington and even New York . But fares will be high , predicts airport manager George Rebella , because even the business market wo n't find enough seats to satisfy demand . Meanwhile , Steve Hogan , director of transportation in the county 's Environmental Management Agency , says commuting on the ground `` should be a little shorter in terms of time , and I hope in terms of distance as well , with people living closer to their jobs than they do now . '' But , lacking funds to build new freeways , the emphasis will be on high-tech traffic management , experts agree . There 's even talk of somehow using the county 's existing freeway emergency call box network as a cheap way to monitor traffic and feed data to traffic control computers . `` It 's like we 're in the movie 'Back to the Future II , ' `` says Stanley T. Oftelie , executive director of the Orange County Transportation Commission . `` There 's no telling what little things we do now will affect traffic several years from now . '' Planned Transportation Corridors Estimated Average Projected Daily Traffic * Opening Corridor Opening Day 2010 Date San Joaquin Hills 100,000 150,000 1994 Transportation Corridor Easter Transportation 60,000 120,000 1995 Corridor Foothill Transportation 45,000 115,000 1994 Corridor ( A ) Foothill Transportation 30,000 75,000 1997 Corridor ( B )