Amid tentative signs of change in North Korea , South Korean Prime Minister Kang Young Hoon today crossed the Demilitarized Zone to become the first chief of a Cabinet in the south ever to visit the Communist north . Kang , accompanied by six other officials and a staff of 33 , is scheduled to arrive in Pyongyang this afternoon for a four-day visit . However , South Korean officials said they expect few results from the talks , which reciprocate a visit to Seoul on Sept. 4-7 by North Korean Prime Minister Yon Hyung Muk . Those meetings failed to produce any agreements . Although neither prime minister exercises independent power in his own right , the exchange marks the highest level of North and South Korean officials to meet in 18 years of off-and-on attempts to ease tension between the two nations . About 43,000 U.S. troops are still stationed in South Korea , 40 years after the Korean War . On Monday , President Roh Tae Woo gave Kang an oral message to deliver when he meets North Korean President Kim Il Sung on Thursday . In it , Roh reportedly urges the 78-year-old Stalinist leader to agree to hold the first north-south summit meeting . Roh also reportedly will assure Kim that South Korea -- which on Sept. 30 established diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union , the north 's chief ally -- has no interest in isolating the north and will propose that both Korean governments `` recognize each other 's existence . '' Crossing the heavily fortified border at the truce village of Panmunjom , Kang said : `` This military demarcation zone . . . is the wall of mistrust and confrontation that has caused numerous tragedies and agonies to our people in the past 40 years , including the separation of 10 million family members . We are going to Pyongyang to bring about the spring of peace and cooperation by melting down this frozen wall . '' Despite South Korean expressions of pessimism , the talks are occurring in the aftermath of a series of apparent changes in North Korean attitudes over the last month . Only three days before Seoul and Moscow declared they were establishing relations , North Korea for the first time agreed to open talks on setting up diplomatic ties with Japan , Korea 's former colonial master . Kang 's trip to the north also follows a series of friendly grass-roots gestures that began with Koreans from both north and south cheering jointly for their separate sports teams at the recent Asian Games in Beijing . The first sports exchange between the two countries , a soccer game that the north won 2 to 1 , was held in Pyongyang on Thursday . And on Sunday , the first private group of South Koreans to visit North Korea , a band of 14 traditional musicians , accompanied by three reporters , received a warm welcome in Pyongyang , where they will perform concerts , some with North Korean musicians , until Oct. 24 . At the least , the prime ministers ' talks are expected to provide a reading of whether Pyongyang 's about-face in seeking diplomatic relations with Japan represents a potential opening of its closed society . Among the agreements reached by the North Korean Workers Party and a mission of Japan 's ruling Liberal Democratic Party were calls for an opening of a direct air route between Tokyo and Pyongyang , stepped-up economic exchange and North Korean use of Japanese satellite facilities . One highly placed South Korean source said the two governments might agree to unprecedented barter trade of South Korean rice for North Korean potatoes . In the past , North Korea , which has portrayed the South as a poor , struggling nation in its domestic propaganda , has refused consistently to accept South Korean offers of economic assistance or direct trade .