Qintex Australia Ltd. , the media and property empire built by entrepreneur Christopher Skase , went into receivership Tuesday in an effort to ward off complete liquidation . The cash-starved company , which has been in a downward spiral since its proposed buyout of the MGM/UA movie studio collapsed in October , asked an Australian court to place it in receivership to prevent the group 's foreign and Australian banks from breaking up the company . The court appointed David Crawford and John Allpass , chartered accountants with KPMG Peat Marwick Hungerfords , as receivers and managers of Qintex Australia and 28 associated companies , stripping Skase of an operational role in the company . Qintex 's debt now totals $ 1.6 billion , and the company is expected to sell all of its resort and property assets -- including a high-priced 232-acre oceanfront parcel in Orange County -- while retaining its television network and perhaps its local television stations . Peter Buchanan , a lawyer representing Qintex , told the Supreme Court in Victoria state that it is vital for Seven Network and other Qintex television stations to continue operating so they do not lose their broadcasting licenses . Crawford and Allpass were given wide powers , including the right to hire and fire , sell Qintex assets and borrow money . A spokesman for Qintex Entertainment Inc. , a Beverly Hills firm that is 43 % owned by Qintex Australia , said that firm now has `` little contact '' with Qintex Australia and still hopes to emerge from Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection . Qintex Entertainment has been in Chapter 11 since the parent company refused to advance needed cash after the aborted MGM/UA deal . Bryan Madden , director of research at Prudential Bache in Melbourne , said the receivership is akin to a Chapter 11 filing in the United States . The banks wanted to avoid a liquidation , he said , because the sale of all Qintex assets would cover only a bit more than half the outstanding debts . `` What is certain now is that all the resorts will go , and all the land will go , '' Madden said . Qintex purchased the 232-acre parcel near Dana Point in southern Orange County last July and took an option on a 115-acre property nearby with the intention of building a luxury resort . But the company earlier this month forfeited its right to the second parcel when it missed an installment payment . Local real estate experts said the price Qintex paid for the larger property -- $ 132 million -- was exorbitant . Qintex owns two luxury resorts in Australia and the Princeville resort in Hawaii . Princeville announced Monday that the extensive renovation work under way at the site has been suspended .