Local governments hereabouts do n't get many developers asking to build smaller buildings than the law allows . But it may happen in the beach town of Dana Point . And , in an ironic twist , the town will probably oppose it . This is n't just any construction project , either . At stake is one of the choicest pieces of real estate in California , a billion dollars or so and the reputation of a brash Australian financial wizard . The wiz is Christopher C. Skase , the dapper chairman of Qintex Group , the Australian hotel and television conglomerate . Qintex recently paid a king 's ransom for the Dana Point land , where Hawaii resort developer Christopher B. Hemmeter had planned a huge , gaudy resort . Now Qintex says it has scrapped Hemmeter 's plan . Instead it plans to build a smaller , plusher resort to compete directly with the Ritz-Carlton just up the road , which caters almost exclusively to the carriage trade . But the town of Dana Point may not want a smaller hotel , which could mean less revenue from a room tax and more residential development . And as Qintex 's other big U.S. deal falls apart -- the purchase of the MGM/UA movie studio at a price some analysts considered way too high -- it raises questions about Qintex 's financial ability to become a big player in the U.S. entertainment and leisure industry . Qintex insists the apparent failure of the studio deal wo n't affect the resort . But both deals are similar in one way : The resort deal is almost as complicated as the intricate MGM/UA deal . And if a fight develops between Dana Point and Qintex over the size of the hotel , for instance , it could take a lot longer -- and a lot more money -- to get the hotel built . Dana Point , at first blush , suggests nothing of high finance . It used to be a sleepy little beach town known for funky neighborhoods , cheap apartments and good surfing . The surfing is still good . But Dana Point is known now as a place where a lot for a single house near the ocean can sell for several million dollars . Supervisors Blamed The town began changing in 1971 , when a yacht harbor opened . Some of the resulting growth was n't planned very well . The town folk blamed the five county supervisors 20 miles or so up the freeway in Santa Ana . Last year they 'd had enough : They voted to incorporate and take control . But developers managed to persuade the county supervisors to approve 1,700 new homes before the incorporation . ( This in a town of 28,000 . ) So no matter where you go in Dana Point these days , you are never far from the skeletal frames of new houses and the drumbeat of hammers . The biggest change , though , is the hotels . There are two of them perched on the bluffs above the ocean : the marble-laden Ritz-Carlton and the less stuffy Dana Point Resort . With the hotels and the tourists and the construction and the bustle , the town is beginning to seem less like the funky beach town it once was and more like its trendy neighbors just up the coast : artsy-craftsy Laguna Beach and glitzy Newport Beach with its yachts and socialites . It had to happen eventually : Dana Point was the closest place to Los Angeles that still had lots of empty land for sale right on the ocean . Drive south down the coast from Los Angeles County and the first big open space that 's not already spoken for is just behind Dana Point 's Monarch Beach , namely , 232 empty acres on a bluff overlooking the Pacific . It is , says Christopher B. Hemmeter , a man with an eye for choice real estate , `` one of the best pieces of land in the United States . '' First on California Coast Hemmeter should know ; he has made a mint picking good spots , most of them in Hawaii , on which to put hotels . This was to be his first on the California coast . It was 1987 when Hemmeter joined two local developers , David Stein and Barry Brief , to build one of Hemmeter 's elaborate resorts . ( Stein-Brief Group owned the land , and Stein-Brief and Hemmeter paid Stein-Brief 's lender just $ 32 million to obtain the land free and clear less than two years ago . ) The hotel was to be a copy of William Randolph Hearst 's grandiose castle in San Simeon . The old press lord probably would have liked the frills Hemmeter planned : a water ride through a Japanese garden , a theater big enough to stage an opera and an ice-skating rink . The partners needed $ 450 million to build it . They hired an investment banker to find an investor who would put in $ 150 million in return for 50 % of the hotel . The group would then borrow the other $ 300 million , according to David Stein . The investment banker brought them Skase , and Skase surprised everyone by offering to buy the whole thing . `` They asked what price I 'd accept , '' Hemmeter says . `` I told them our bankers would n't let us turn down $ 100 million more than what we paid for it . They came back with an offer of $ 132 million . We could n't turn it down . '' Qintex had paid a stiff price , and almost all of it in cash , a source said . On the other hand , it was no longer a junior partner . Now that it had gotten rid of Hemmeter , it could design any sort of hotel it wanted . And it was in a position to go out and find investors to risk their own cash in return for just a minority interest in the hotel . If Qintex can make its new hotel a going concern , it will look like a pretty smart deal . If the hotel is a bust , however , it could put a serious dent in Qintex 's plans to become a major operator of resorts in the United States . That kind of gamble is not unusual for Skase , 41 , the nattily attired former stockbroker and business reporter . He is regarded by admirers as something of a precocious genius , a man who according to Qintex lore became a millionaire while still in his 20s . Skase took the Brisbane-based company from practically nothing to $ 2 billion a year in revenues . Produced `` Lonesome Dove '' Besides the MGM deal , Qintex is probably best known in the states for producing `` Lonesome Dove , '' the hit television miniseries . But it has also built two big Australian resorts , acquired an Australian television network and bought a Hawaiian resort . Not , however , without detractors . Qintex stock has languished until recent months , when the problems with the MGM/UA deal sent it plummeting from $ 1.50 Australian to the 40-cent range ; even before MGM/UA , the company had a propensity to scare off investors by running up heavy debt . `` The stock 's performed dismally , '' says Brad Orgill , an analyst for S.G. Warburg & Co. in Melbourne . It was the film business that first lured Qintex to America . After picking up a small company , Qintex went big time : It outbid another Australian tycoon , Rupert Murdoch , for MGM/UA . That deal was to cost Skase a hefty $ 1.5 billion . But last week MGM/UA backed out and accused Skase of missing a September deadline for delivering a $ 50 million letter of credit . Qintex accused MGM/UA of queering the deal by continuing to make exorbitant demands after the deal was closed . The lesson , of course , is that glamorous stuff like resorts and movie studios do n't come cheap . But at first it 's hard to see what 's so glamorous about Dana Point . It is , after all , a nice little town . But it 's not Hawaii or Tahiti . The answer , oddly enough , is back in Hawaii : The place is overrun with resorts . There are n't many suitable spots left on which to build a new one . Searching the Globe So resort developers fan out over the globe looking for likely locations . One of the likeliest is Southern California , since it comes with its own enormous , ready-made market . After some rocky years , the success of the Ritz-Carlton -- which is celebrating its fifth anniversary -- showed a resort hotel could work in Orange County . The Ritz-Carlton is one reason everybody with a piece of coastal property in the county is building a hotel these days . The lesson has n't been lost on Qintex , either . In fact , now that Qintex has tossed out Hemmeter 's Hawaiian fantasy , Qintex executives say they want to build the kind of resort they 're more comfortable with , the kind they run in Australia and which they compare -- with a little exaggeration , say experts -- to the Ritz-Carlton . There 's just one small problem : The land Qintex bought is approved for two adjacent hotels , an 800-room behemoth and a 300-room building . Together , they would be one of the largest hotels on the California coast . That 's a perfect size for Hemmeter 's waterfalls , ponds and opera house . But it is too big and impersonal to have the same cachet as the Ritz-Carlton . With only 393 rooms and 850 employees , the Ritz-Carlton boasts better than two employees per room and the sort of service that keeps the Dom Perignon cold and the towels hot for its rich , pampered guests . The hotel is , in fact , Dana Point 's largest employer . Extremely Expensive When Skase told The Times in July at the time of the land sale that his hotel would be less than 1,000 rooms , he was apparently thinking about the Ritz-Carlton and this fact of hotel economics : In order to make a profit , a hotel needs to charge $ 1 in room rates for every $ 1,000 it costs to build the room . Qintex 's hotel will be extremely expensive since Qintex paid such a princely sum for the land . So the hotel will have to be very posh indeed to justify the steep room rates it will need to charge . There are other advantages to a smaller hotel , advantages that may also be crucial if the resort is to make money on all that expensive land . A smaller hotel might leave Qintex more room to build condominiums and houses around the resort . Qintex says it is considering this . And well it should : They would be extremely profitable to build . You can charge a lot more for houses when they are near a resort or close to a golf course , and there is a golf course already operating on the property . Selling high-priced houses could also defray the costs of buying the land and tide the hotel over its first -- and probably unprofitable -- years . Qintex already builds homes at its two Australian resorts . If you do n't want to use your villa -- as Qintex calls condos -- year-round , the hotel will rent them to guests for you . But over at Dana Point 's tiny City Hall -- a trailer where city officials wait for their new rented offices to be finished -- the notion of more houses and a smaller hotel sets off alarms . The reason : Fewer hotel rooms mean less revenue from the city 's 8 % room tax . The Hemmeter hotel , by some estimates , would have brought in a cool $ 5 million to $ 6 million a year . That 's terribly appealing to a town that takes in less than $ 10 million a year and which -- until little less than a year ago -- depended on the largess of county government for its public services . Another worry is traffic . New houses would probably generate as much traffic as a resort hotel , where at least the guests stay put , and it might generate more . Irate residents have killed projects they thought created too much traffic . Stein and Hemmeter spent months haggling with the county , the state Coastal Commission and now the new city government for approval to build their hotel . Getting a change could take Skase more months -- perhaps years -- and lots more money , which Qintex says it realized going into the deal . Because residents do n't want the traffic from new housing , `` there 'll be major resistance if Qintex decides to downscale the hotel or put houses on that land , '' says City Manager William O. Talley . Eileen Krause , the town 's new mayor , is a little more conciliatory . She would n't mind a smaller hotel , she says , but not if that means making room for more houses . Some town folk say they are starting to get nervous because Qintex has yet to announce definite plans for the Hemmeter land and another parcel just down the road . ( Qintex says it will have an announcement within 90 days . ) Headlands Property That other piece of land is 115 acres on the Dana Point headlands a quarter of a mile down the coast , for which Qintex paid another $ 115 million . The headlands is a stunning piece of property , but `` a very emotional one for the town , '' says a city planner . A town landmark , the headlands was empty when 19th-Century novelist Richard Henry Dana first sailed by in 1835 and mentioned it in `` Two Years Before the Mast . '' ( The town later borrowed his name . ) Most of the headlands has remained empty since . Whatever goes up there is sure to be unpopular with at least some town folk . A fence across the property is routinely breached by surfers and other locals with a proprietary interest in this stretch of coast . Chandler-Sherman Corp. , the old owner , had persuaded the county to zone the land for quite a few townhouses and two hotels . But as yet nobody holds a permit to actually build anything . Qintex actually went after this piece of property before the Hemmeter property , but buying both may have been smart : Since the two properties are tied together , any improvements Qintex makes to the Hemmeter property -- like the planned upgrading of the golf course there -- enhances the value of the houses it builds down the road at the headlands . What seems likely to happen , Qintex says , is this : The company will ask to build an extremely lavish -- if smaller -- hotel on the Hemmeter property and build mostly houses and condominiums -- and possibly another small hotel -- on the headlands , still close enough to the resort for residents to use the golf course , restaurants and other amenities . But then there 's this last small problem : Where are these new hotels going to find enough guests ? A waterfront hotel is going up in Huntington Beach and -- within the next few years -- on the Irvine Co. property between Newport Beach and Laguna Beach . Within a few years , there will be thousands of new hotel rooms on a stretch of coast that until five years ago had none . Some experts expect at least a temporary glut . And some are skeptical that the Orange County coast will attract tourists from all over the world . `` As Orange County continues to urbanize , who wants to come to a smoggy and congested part of the country for a vacation ? '' asks Christopher B. Leinberger of real estate consultants Robert Charles Lesser & Co . The real money to be made in those hotels , then , is likely to be from conventions and business conferences . Resort hotels are so expensive to build these days that most of them ca n't rely on tourists to return their owners ' investment : They have to scramble for convention business too . Even the Ritz-Carlton , which by all accounts has made a roaring success catering to the rich , says it makes a lot of its money from mundane business meetings . And when the Irvine Co. 's first hotel -- a 1,100-room Marriott -- opens up the coast in 1993 , it will have a big advantage over almost everyone else : It will be only minutes from John Wayne Airport , an obvious attraction to people who book conventions . But Qintex 's hotel may have an advantage too , a little something called rich Japanese investors . Although no announcement has been made yet , the Japanese are likely to be big investors in the resort , sources said . The Japanese can borrow money in Japan at lower interest rates and thus can invest a lot for a rate of return that looks piddling by U.S. standards . That means that while the sums they pay for hotels and golf courses and office buildings seem astronomical and unprofitable from the U.S. point of view , Japanese buyers can still make a decent profit because they borrowed money at such low rates . And there are cultural differences too , which mean Japanese investors wo n't be pressing Qintex for a quick score : They 're often willing to take a small return now in exchange for a big payoff down the road if , for instance , the hotel is sold . It was the Japanese who bailed Qintex out when it got top-heavy with debt from building its two Australian resorts and buying the Princeville resort in Hawaii . Skase sold 49 % of the three resorts to consumer credit company Nippon Shinpan Co. and the trading concern Mitsui and Co. As part of that deal , both got first crack at buying 49 % of the Dana Point hotel and , given the enthusiasm of Japanese investors for resorts and golf courses , there is a good chance they will take it . The Japanese like hotels and resorts because -- when inflation 's running high -- you do n't have to wait for a lease to expire before you can raise prices . Tokyo Masuiwaya , Japan 's biggest maker of kimonos , bought the nearby Dana Point Resort in July for $ 104 million from Edward and Thomas Slatkin , who walked away with $ 40 million more than they paid for the hotel last year . At the nearby Ritz-Carlton , however -- where rooms start at $ 185 a night and run up to $ 2,000 for a suite with a study , grand piano and fireplace -- the management professes not to be worried by the prospect of competition from Qintex . `` A five-star hotel is not just marble and crystal , '' sniffs Henry E. Schielein , the Ritz-Carlton 's general manager . `` They still have to prove they can do it . And I wo n't lose sleep over it until I see something happen . ''