For anyone nostalgic or curious about the early-'80s punk rock explosion in Orange County , deja vu is scheduled to set in on Dec. 29 , when the original lineup of T.S.O.L . will reunite at the Celebrity Theatre in Anaheim . It will be the four founding members ' first show together since 1983 . T.S.O.L . ( True Sounds of Liberty ) made a reputation as one of the most charismatic , stormily unpredictable and , at its peak , biggest-drawing bands on the Southern California punk scene before dwindling popularity and an acrimonious split ended the original lineup 's run . The show , promoted by Goldenvoice Presents , is a one-time get-together and does not signal an attempt to re-form the original T.S.O.L . on a continuing basis , singer Jack Grisham said Wednesday . `` We never had a chance '' to play a big farewell concert when the band broke up in 1983 , Grisham said . `` The last show we played was in the Cathay de Grande ( in Los Angeles ) on a Wednesday night , and there were about 100 people there . '' The original T.S.O.L . broke up when Grisham and drummer Todd Barnes parted with bassist Mike Roche and guitarist Ron Emory , who revamped the band with new members and a more blues-influenced hard-rock approach . That Phase 2 T.S.O.L. , with Roche now the only remaining founding member , has continued to tour and record since 1984 and is scheduled to release its fifth album , `` Strangelove , '' next year on Enigma Records . Grisham said the original T.S.O.L . members decided to set aside their still-lingering personal differences to play one more show featuring their old songs . `` We have n't even talked to each other for the past four years , '' he said . `` They got us together little by little , in twos . Ron Emory was just over to my house today ( to talk about the reunion show ) . It was the first time he 'd been here in five years . '' As of Wednesday , the day tickets for the concert went on sale , the four original T.S.O.L . members still had not met together as a unit , Grisham said . The main motive for the reunion is `` for the hell of it , '' Grisham said . `` It 'll be kind of fun . '' But it also holds the prospect of a big payday . The money `` helps -- they 're paying us a lot , '' he acknowledged . Also , Grisham said , attention from the T.S.O.L . reunion could help in promoting his current band , Tender Fury , which is due to release its second album , `` Garden of Evil , '' in January . Emory 's new group , Lunchbox , will also be releasing a debut album next year . While the reunion figures to please older punk rock fans looking to relive younger and wilder days , as well as newer fans hoping to see what it was like the first time around , it is a source of friction within the current T.S.O.L . lineup . `` It 's been put to us as a one-time show , so we just hope it comes and goes , and we get on with our career , '' said drummer Mitch Dean , who joined T.S.O.L . in 1984 with singer Joe Wood , beginning the band 's second incarnation . `` Me and Joe have both said we do n't like the idea of it , but we have n't been left much of a choice . I just feel it 's confusing our audience at a touchy time . '' Wood , who is Jack Grisham 's brother-in-law , was more blunt in voicing his disapproval : `` It would be a rip-off to the public . It 's a one-night thing of four guys who want quick money . They do n't care about the old music . '' According to Dean , Roche 's commitment to the ongoing T.S.O.L . had led him to dismiss previous reunion offers for the original lineup . Roche could not be reached for comment . `` For years he was adamantly against a show like this , '' said Mike Zoto , manager of the current T.S.O.L . `` I think in his heart he did n't want to do this , but other factors besides his heart forced him to do it . `` It 's going to be an event , there 's no question about it , '' Zoto said of the original band 's reunion , but the ongoing version of T.S.O.L . will now have `` a lot of internal reconciliation to deal with . ''