Melizza Benitez School : El Modena High School Sport : Volleyball Position : Setter Class : Junior Marni Hichborn might get most of the attention for leading El Modena 's undefeated girls ' volleyball team , but it 's Benitez who sets up Hichborn for the 16 to 17 kills she averages . Benitez had 42 assists and eight blocks in the Vanguards ' four-game victory over South Torrance Saturday in the second round of the 3-A Division playoffs . In the first round Thursday , she had 29 assists and six blocks in a three-game victory over Temecula Valley . And this from a player who has been a setter for less than a year . After last season , in which Benitez was a second-team all-Century League outside hitter , El Modena Coach Craig Tefertiller asked her to become a setter . `` She 's just a superior athlete with good instincts for setting , '' Tefertiller said . `` She gets the ball to the right players at the right time . She 's only 5-9 but she must have a six-foot wingspan because she 's the second-best blocker on the team after Marni . '' Other top performers : Page Bartelt , who swept her singles sets ( 6-0 , 6-1 , 6-0 ) to lead Capistrano Valley to a 14-4 victory over University in the first round of the 4-A Division girls ' tennis playoffs Thursday . Michelle Mauney and Marta Bickert , who had 18 and 17 kills , respectively , for Capistrano Valley in a four-game victory over Santa Margarita Thursday in the first round of the 5-A Division girls ' volleyball playoffs . Martha Pinto , a Katella runner who had the best time for an Orange County runner ( 18 minutes 6 seconds for three miles ) and won her II-A Division heat at the Southern Section cross-country preliminaries Saturday at Mt . San Antonio College . Chris Prigmore , who had 22 kills for Calvary Chapel in a three-game sweep of First Lutheran in the first round of the Small Schools Division playoffs Thursday . Shelley Taylor , who won her II-AA Division heat by more than a minute for Edison , finishing in 18:27 in the Southern Section cross-country preliminaries Saturday .