The first step in fixing the Exxon Valdez is done , so officials and workers at the San Diego shipyard where it 's under repair had a party Saturday . It 's not every day , they figured , that they could show off a 600-foot-long tunnel cut out of an oil tanker . All invited were encouraged to roam through the tunnel , cut through the belly of the giant tanker by slicing through 1,600 tons of steel , as well as to gaze up at the ribs , the skeleton and the scrubbed oil and ballast tanks rising above -- and to ponder the awesome destruction told in the eerie spectacle under the ship 's right side . There , sitting on concrete and wooden blocks three feet above the ground , are what 's left of the sheets of steel that used to form the starboard hull of the Valdez before it ran aground in March on a submerged reef in Alaska , causing the nation 's worst oil spill . Illuminated by powerful work lights and criss-crossed with scaffolding , whole sheets of the ship 's skin are shredded , twisted and crumpled . It looks more like a discarded beer can than steel three-quarters of an inch thick . `` That it could be tangled this way -- unbelievable , '' said Dennis Krumweide , manager of structural engineering at the National Steel & Shipbuilding Co. , where the Valdez is in drydock . `` This is the sort of damage I think happens in war , getting hit by torpedoes , the like , '' said Peter Zschiesche a machinists ' union representative at Nassco . `` Here you get the chance to put the ship back together . '' Nassco officials said candidly Saturday that putting the ship back together also means getting the chance to focus attention on their company , on U.S. shipbuilding and on the foreign competition that has defeated many other U.S. shipyards . Financially troubled and beset by bitter strikes over recent years , then the object of a management-led buyout last spring , Nassco is , however , still alive -- and the West Coast 's only remaining shipbuilder . Work on the Valdez , so far , is ahead of schedule , and Nassco officials said they hope that kind of performance on the big ship will attract other building and repair jobs , large and small . Nassco has a `` once-in-a-lifetime opportunity '' because of the attention the Valdez has generated , said Dan Peoples , a spokesman the company has hired . `` We could have people in here every day of the week , looking at repairs to some Navy ship , and they 'd be yawning , saying , 'Ho-hum . ' `` Even with the great attraction , the company went to some lengths Saturday to impress . It transported visitors to and fro on modified golf carts , offered juice and doughnuts and hoisted photographers on a special motorized scaffold . All it asked was that visitors be careful and take heed of the signs warning of `` rocks and falling debris . '' The Valdez was towed to Nassco , where it was built in 1986 , after it slammed March 24 into an Alaskan reef , spilling some 11 millions of gallons of oil . The ship arrived off San Diego July 10 , but its entry into San Diego Bay was delayed by the discovery of steel plates that were jutting from its hull , as well as an 18-mile slick nearby . The plates eventually were removed , and the state and Exxon reached an agreement to allow the ship into state waters . The ship , 987 feet long and 166 feet wide , was eased Aug. 15 into drydock . The first phase of the repair work involved cutting away those center sections of the hull that also were shredded or twisted . To do that , crews had to slice through the bow of the ship , which was undamaged , so they could get to the hull underneath -- and to create room to work . The drydock is only 33 feet longer than the ship and affords only two or three feet of space on the sides . After the bow was opened up , crews then removed the 15 structural frames -- each 40 feet long , 44 feet wide and 16 feet high -- that , welded together , comprised the damaged center . That part of the job took seven weeks , was completed Nov. 9 and resulted in the 600-foot tunnel . The job is `` about five weeks ahead '' of schedule , Krumweide said . Beginning Tuesday , crews will begin replacing the frames , two a week , Krumweide said . Each unit , weighing 100 tons and supported by hydraulic lifts and air bags , must be navigated through the tunnel with precisely one-half inch of space on either side of its 44-foot width , he said . After the center is repaired , workers will repeat the pattern on to the right side , tearing down the frames , then welding in the new ones , Krumweide said . When finished , the ship will be the `` same strength '' as before the accident , he said . Work is expected to be completed by next July , Krumweide said . Budget estimates for the work are $ 25 or $ 30 million , said Fred N. Hallett , Nassco 's vice president for finance . Though expensive , the cost of repairing the ship falls far below the $ 130 million to $ 150 million Nassco officials previously have said it would cost to build a new one .