Do you hesitate when someone asks what your name is or when you come to the part of a form where you 're asked to identify yourself ? If so , you might be suffering from an increasingly common disorder called `` Women Who Have Kept Their Maiden Name but Sometimes Use Their Husband 's . '' When I decided to retain my name nine years ago , it did n't seem like a particularly momentous decision . I had grown accustomed to it and had no desire to start all over with a new one . My husband supported me and understood completely . We both agreed , however , that there were older relatives who would not understand and I would use his name in my dealings with them . In retrospect , that is how this nightmare started . From then on it became easier to do the same in other situations . And soon I became a habitual name changer . The first real problem we experienced was when we had children and started using baby-sitters . Naively , I gave my name to them without a second thought . It was not until they started calling back that the problem surfaced . `` There is n't a Mr. Hazlewood here , '' my husband would explain , only to have a confused teen-ager insist she had baby-sat for us once . Eventually he learned to answer in a noncommittal manner until he learned the purpose of the call . Things reached an all-time low , however , when my husband was forced one day to identify himself as Mr. Hazlewood . I persuaded him to do this in lieu of a lengthy explanation to the caller . He did so , with a great deal of embarrassment , but refused any further involvement in name swapping . Finally , I relented and started giving my husband 's name to baby-sitters . Another area of contention is the whole problem of reservations . We are continually forgetting what name the dinner reservations are under and what name to give the shoe repair service when we go to pick up our shoes . One of our biggest fiascoes was in regard to airline reservations for a vacation to Seattle . My sister , who lives in San Francisco , was boarding there and accompanying us on our vacation . She generously donated one of her frequent-flier vouchers in order for me to receive a free trip . One of the rules was that only a family member with the same last name could use the ticket . So she proceeded to make reservations for the two of us under our common last name as well as for my husband and two children . Meanwhile , my husband , who was organizing the trip , was also making reservations for all of us . For the sake of convenience , he had my reservation under his name . So we ended up with 10 seats on the plane . One evening an angry airline reservation agent telephoned trying to figure out who all these people were . I was going through a rather complicated explanation when he finally asked : `` Now let me get this straight . How many people are really going , and which name is really yours ? '' Then comes kindergarten with endless forms to fill out . Some do not even have a space for my last name ; they just assume it is the same as my husband 's . Sometimes I just use the name that fits best in the space given . No one seems to care , and I 'm not sure anyone is reading those forms anyway . I knew I was in the name-changing business for good when I volunteered to work in my son 's class . He had a very traditional teacher , a no-nonsense sort of person whom I could never imagine being `` Ms. '' anyone . When a mother first works there she is introduced by her child to the whole class . I did not realize this until my son started asking some peculiar questions . `` Mom , what is your name ? '' he inquired after school one day . He knows the answer but has trouble understanding why everyone else 's mother has the same last name as the rest of the family . He became increasingly agitated as the day approached for me to go with him . He finally admitted he was worried about what name to use when he introduced me . Here is a boy who has the only duck-tail haircut in his class , and he was worrying about being different . Memories of being young came rushing back -- the terribly wrong dress I was forced to wear , and the unmatched socks I had to wear because one of my five sisters beat me to the sock drawer . All those painful moments when the price of being different was too high . And so I relented and became Mrs. Slade in matters pertaining to school . I stubbornly cling to my name in the midst of all these compromises . It helps that I 'm not the only one going through this . Perhaps the best solution is offered by British royalty . In that vast multitude of names that Prince Charles and Andrew pronounce at weddings , there is not one last name . As a matter of fact , Queen Elizabeth 's husband gave up his last name when he married her . There is no chance of that happening in our household . Despite the inevitable confusion , I intend to keep my dual identity . My father -- who , after six daughters , finally gave up on his dream of having a son to carry on the family name -- would be proud .