The Rev . John Huffman reached for a worn Bible in his book-lined study . It was a gift , he said , a gesture of graciousness , from a man in the midst of a glorious but doomed career . The inscription says that Huffman , as a messenger of God 's word , `` strengthened each of us in the work of peace and human justice . '' It was signed Richard Nixon . Now pastor of the 4,000-member St. Andrew 's Presbyterian Church in Newport Beach , Huffman wrestles with the day 's political issues , like abortion and homosexuality . But he 's no stranger to the moral hot seat . From 1968-73 , the years dominated by the war in Vietnam and the Watergate scandal , he was the confidante of a besieged President . Though Huffman , 50 , has been pastor of St. Andrew 's for 11 years , he said few members of his congregation are aware of his past . He has rarely been asked about Nixon since the turmoil of the final days , he said . In an unusual interview he granted recently , he stressed he could not , as a pastor , reveal any confidences made by Nixon at that time . But he did talk about his feelings toward Nixon and some of the drama surrounding that turbulent era . He recalled that Nixon , reared an evangelical Quaker , rarely attended church services in Washington . `` He lived with the fear that the same thing would happen to him that happened to Lyndon Johnson -- that he would go to church and be attacked from the pulpit . '' But when Nixon vacationed in Florida , he and his family attended services at Huffman 's Presbyterian church in Key Biscayne , Fla. , which was recommended to Nixon by his friend Bebe Rebozo , a regular churchgoer . Nixon came to church on Easters , after his inauguration and following his trips to China and the Soviet Union . When he came , the services drew about 80 reporters and were usually picketed by war protesters . One called Huffman a `` pig '' and threatened him with an ice pick , he said . At the time , news analysts called Huffman , who had his own radio and television shows , `` flamboyant '' and `` handsome and not particularly modest . '' They noted that Huffman 's rise in prominence paralleled his association with the President . Photographs of the two show dark , wavy-haired men who could be brothers . After Nixon came to his church , he was indeed offered his own television ministry but turned it down , he said . `` I predicted then the TV ministries would get tripped up by finances . '' Huffman , who once aspired to politics `` as a Christian witness , '' said Nixon appreciated his worldly views as well as his sin-and-repentance style of preaching . At Nixon 's request , Huffman preached at the White House and held a special televised service at Key Biscayne to mark the cease fire in the Vietnam War , he said . The day before the United States invaded Cambodia , Nixon shared intelligence information with Huffman over breakfast . `` I talked with him behind the scenes about his ( political ) problems , '' Huffman said . After the Easter Sunday service in 1973 -- amid increasing revelations about the Watergate scandal -- Huffman said he walked Nixon to his car and asked him directly whether he knew anything about the 1972 break-in at the Democratic National Committee offices . `` Nixon assured me , ' I knew nothing about it . ' I can picture his eyes . They were . . . intent . '' While Huffman believed him , that day heralded the beginning of a long estrangement of the two . Huffman 's sermon that day used a Biblical allusion -- `` The King knoweth of these things . . . this thing was not done in a corner . '' It was widely interpreted by the media as criticism of Nixon 's involvement in the cover-up and a call for him to repent . Huffman said the sermon was written before he knew Nixon would attend and was not directed at him . But he learned through the `` White House people '' that eventually Nixon suspected the worst -- that he had been attacked from the pulpit . Later , the publication of secretly taped conversations between Nixon and his aides revealed him to be active in the Watergate cover-up . A Key Biscayne news account that included Huffman 's reaction carried the headline , `` Nixon Lied to Me , Former Minister Says . '' That day , he said , the husband of a church member spat in his face and called him `` traitor . '' Although he had moved by that time to be pastor of a church in Pittsburgh , Huffman said , `` I received hundreds of letters across the country , castigating me for attacking the greatest President this country ever had . '' `` It would break my heart if I would ever say anything unkind to him . At the same time , the record has to stand as it is . He was one of the most complex , in my view brilliant , presidents . And he has a sinister side to him . . . . `` He certainly dealt with fear , or whatever , in terms of the Kennedys , but he would say to this day that he was loyal to John Mitchell and loyalty was one of his highest priorities . Others would say , 'How come ( White House aides H.R . ) Haldeman and ( John D. ) Ehrlichman are in jail ? '' As for himself , Huffman said , `` I love Richard Nixon . '' He used the word gracious repeatedly to characterize Nixon then and now . Huffman said he and Nixon have become friends again . He said he wrote the pardoned president several years ago praising his speeches on international relations and saying he regretted the parting of their paths in 1973 . `` I said I was honestly trying to express my viewpoints on things and I loved him like my own father . He wrote back very graciously , saying let 's let bygones by bygones . Life is too short to carry feelings too long . `` And he sent me his book on leaders , which is very graciously inscribed . '' This one reads , `` To John Huffman , with best wishes . '' NIXON IN CHINA The former president is visiting at a time when Sino-U.S. relations are strained . A4