It was supposed to be a routine and somewhat wistful event -- the last time the Moorpark City Council would select a mayor from among its five members . But instead the municipal ritual went out with a bang , angering and delighting an audience of approximately 75 citizens . In the end , Paul Lawrason , a 61-year-old contracts director for a small aerospace firm , was chosen the eighth mayor in the city 's six-year history by a 3-2 vote , but not until there had been a bitter fight against his colleague Bernardo Perez and a raucous 15-minute recess to give the participants a chance to collect themselves . Moorpark voters last year overwhelmingly adopted an initiative enabling them to elect their mayor rather than having the five council members choose the mayor from among themselves . The ballot measure grew out of a city scandal in which one councilman was forced to resign and the mayor was recalled amid never-proven allegations of kickbacks from a developer . Wednesday night marked the last time the council would select a mayor -- a largely ceremonial post , because the 25,000-resident city employs a full-time city manager . Perez , a 40-year-old employee of the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power , and the council 's mayor pro tem , wanted to be the last chosen mayor . He was nominated by Councilman Clint Harper , as expected , but in a turn of events that appeared to catch Perez off guard , Councilman Scott Montgomery proposed that the position be rotated during the coming term . Montgomery proposed rotating the mayor 's job among himself , Perez and Lawrason , who were all elected last year and have not yet had a chance to serve as mayor . Perez , who appeared nonplussed , said he would refuse to participate in such a plan . At that point , Montgomery nominated Lawrason . Perez 's supporter Harper said , `` We do n't contribute to the community by making Moorpark appear to its residents and to other cities to be a bit of a political circus . What we 're doing tonight is introducing personal feelings when they should n't be there . In other communities , this would be virtually automatic . '' Montgomery was elected mayor pro tem after Perez refused the nomination .