About 30 protesters urged Cal State Northridge to address the problems of American Indian students , claiming 92 % of them drop out because the university does not try hard enough to retain them . Among other things , the protesters want counselors to provide academic advice and organize activities for the 208 American Indians on campus . They also called on the university to recruit American Indian students . The demonstrators also demanded that university administrators keep a promise made in May to provide the 20-member American Indian Student Assn . with more study and meeting space . The group currently shares a converted storage closet with another student organization , said protester Nancy Peterson-Walter , a former part-time anthropology instructor at Cal State Northridge who counseled American Indian students before leaving the university in 1987 . Peter Aguirre , president of the American Indian Student Assn. , said a survey by his organization showed that , on average , 45.5 % of the campus ' American Indian students drop out after their freshman year . Only 7.7 % manage to graduate , he said . The latest statistics compiled by the university show that , of American Indian freshmen who enrolled in 1983 , just 10 % graduated . Overall , 45 % of the students who enroll as freshmen go on to graduate , university officials said . `` It 's important that American Indian students on campus have a gathering place , '' Peterson-Walter said . `` The number of American Indian students is decreasing at a higher rate than all other ethnic minority groups , but the population is increasing . If there 's anything that 's desperately needed , it 's higher education . '' American Indians are the smallest minority group on campus , making up only 0.69 % of the 30,000-student population , according to registration statistics compiled last spring . An interdisciplinary program begun in the late 1970s offers a minor in American Indian studies . By contrast , Asians , who recently won approval for creation of a full department of Asian-American studies , make up 12 % of the student population . Registration records indicate that 11 % of the university 's students identify themselves as Latino and 5 % as black . Pan-African and Chicano studies departments were established in 1969 in the wake of student and community protests . Jacqueline Jacobs , associate vice president for academic services , said the university plans to hire two American Indian counselors to recruit American Indian high school and transfer students . She also said the School of Social and Behavioral Sciences , which oversees the American Indian studies minor , is considering American Indian applicants for the position of educational equity coordinator , which will oversee relations with minority groups in the school . University spokeswoman Ann Salisbury said she sympathized with the protesters but said American Indians already have access to academic counseling through the American Indian studies program . She also said she doubted the demonstrators ' sincerity , because they held the protest at the same time that other minority groups were gathering on campus to discuss ways to improve ethnic and race relations . The discussions were part of events this month in honor of the university 's cultural diversity and racial awareness . The demonstrators targeted Columbus Day to protest what they called the historic oppression of American Indians by whites . `` 1492 : That was the beginning for European Americans but the end for American Indian people , '' protester Rene Orozco said .