Consumers Union and a coalition of health groups filed a petition with the state Monday charging that insurance companies have engaged in an `` unconscionable pattern of abuse and discrimination '' against families who have children with cancer . The petition , filed with Insurance Commissioner Roxani Gillespie , contends that insurance companies have added to the trauma of cancer for many families by delaying payments , denying benefits for procedures that should be covered , raising premium rates and imposing limits on benefits without proper notice . The petition did not single out any individual insurance companies but called on the commissioner to investigate these alleged practices and revoke the licenses of companies found to act improperly . `` Health insurers operate with almost total disregard for both the law and for simple decency , '' said Rose Hughes , a leader of the recently formed Parents of Kids with Cancer . `` The insurance commissioner has to protect the public from such abhorrent abuse . '' When her son had cancer , Hughes said , her family lost their house , car and other belongings -- in part because their insurance company delayed some payments for months and refused to pay for some treatments that should have been covered . Under state law , insurance companies are required to pay all claims within 30 days . Brent Barnhart , a lobbyist for the Assn . of California Life Insurance Companies , said that most health insurance companies meet the deadline . He acknowledged , however , that disputes arise over claims that cancer victims believe should be covered but are considered by the companies to be experimental and therefore not eligible for payment . Gillespie 's office issued a statement saying she is `` very concerned about the availability and affordability of health coverage -- and the efficient delivery of such services -- in California . '' Gillespie , who is considering running for the office of state insurance commissioner in 1990 when it becomes an elective post for the first time , expressed a willingness to cooperate with the coalition that filed the petition . But her office noted that the commissioner oversees only a portion of the health insurance industry because some companies are regulated by other agencies and some insurers are exempt from state regulation . The petition cites nine alleged cases of abuse and discrimination against cancer patients by insurance companies . In some cases , the document claims , delayed payments and denied benefits created extreme financial hardship for the families and jeopardized treatment for the patients . Representatives of the coalition conceded the petition was intended , in part , to help shape next year 's race for insurance commissioner and make health insurance an important part of the public debate .