Batman outfits selling for up to $ 300 ? Sixty bucks and more just for the rubber mask ? Holy price hikes ! Welcome to the new era of costume marketing . Now that grown-ups are rediscovering the joys of the Halloween season in a big way , many of those who sell and rent costumes and accessories are zeroing in on upscale adult pocketbooks . The result : Expensive costumes for people in their 20s , 30s and well beyond are becoming a growing part of the business -- and , apparently , an annoyance to some less flamboyant consumers . Southern California -- a haven for conspicuous consumption and home to several costume shops that cater to the entertainment industry and trend-setting masqueraders -- is one of the nation 's hottest markets . `` We 're finding that people want to be special , '' said Paul Abramowitz , president of Hollywood 's vast Western Costume Co. , the world 's largest costume house . `` They want to be unique . And they 'll pay virtually anything to do that . '' Western rents out Halloween outfits for $ 75 to $ 500 a day , with the average customer spending about $ 100 . Pat Burdy , owner of Somewhere in Time Costumes & Masks in Pasadena , is finding that `` people begin to get gun-shy at $ 275 or $ 300 '' for one-day rentals . But , she quickly added , many customers get caught up in the Halloween spirit and spend that much and more anyway . The average shopper is more apt to buy than rent an outfit . And , retailers say , most shoppers typically spend less than than $ 40 on children 's disguises and no more than about $ 60 for complete adult outfits . But even that price range is too high for many Halloween party-goers . Shirley Murray , a contract administrator for the Defense Department , stopped this week at a Halloween concession in the Northridge Fashion Center intending to jazz up her homemade leopard outfit . She went away empty-handed . `` Twenty-five dollars ? Oh my God ! '' Murray exclaimed when she got the word about the price of a black `` wild shag '' wig . `` I do n't want to pay $ 25 for a wig . I could mess up my hair that bad myself , '' she said . `` Most of my friends are going to buy accessories and put their own thing together , '' Murray said later . `` They do n't want to spend that kind of money just to fool around the office one day . '' Perhaps even more frustrated are parents with tight budgets . Children 's plastic outfits costing $ 6 to $ 8 are being pushed off retailers ' shelves by more costly , albeit more durable , fabric disguises . Elaine Miller , a self-employed transcriber in Ventura , said she considered buying outfits for her two sons , ages 4 1/2 and 6 1/2 . Then she scanned the selections at Toys R Us and a couple of mail-order catalogues , and found nothing left below $ 20 . `` I could n't believe it , '' Miller said . `` It was n't something I wanted to spend that kind of money on with Christmas , school supplies and other expenses coming up . '' Now Miller plans to dig up materials from around the house to put together cowboy outfits or perhaps a pillow case ghost costume for her boys . Other parents are heading to fabric stores . Even parents with permissive pocketbooks seem to have their limits . At the Disney Store in Northridge , $ 55 Minnie Mouse outfits for little girls quickly sold out . But it has been much slower going for the $ 120 Cinderella dresses with the white lace and silk fronts . The booming popularity in recent years of adult Halloween parties at home and work fuels the demand for fancy costumes , retailers say . Hallmark Cards researchers estimate that more than 50 million Americans , mostly adults , will attend Halloween parties this year , up 25 % from three years ago . Retailers say that after Christmas , Halloween is their best time of the year . The statistics on Halloween shopping trends , however , are n't universally accepted . Hallmark also estimates that costume buyers spend an average of $ 30 on their purchases , a figure that many Southern California retailers believe is low . No one , though , denies that adults are spending more than they used to on costumes for Halloween and , for that matter , masquerade parties throughout the year . Maureen Holmes of Arcadia , who runs an auto body shop with her husband , is a case in point . Last year she dished out about $ 200 to dress up like Mad Maxine . This year she is renting a less expensive cat outfit , but she expects to pay `` a few thousand dollars '' for decorations to create a haunted house look for a combination Halloween and 40th birthday party for herself and a friend . Why spend so much on Halloween ? It 's a chance to act out fantasies and relieve stress , Holmes said , as well as to outdo your friends . `` It 's just sheer fun , '' she said . To cash in on the free-spending Halloween trend and raise some money , the Center Theatre Group Costume Shop decided last year to start renting out its outfits to the public . The shop , which serves as the costume department for the Ahmanson Theatre and the Mark Taper Forum in Los Angeles , has an inventory of theatrical costumes originally made for the likes of Charlton Heston and Lauren Bacall . But it also offers less exotic outfits . In fact , CTG 's top five rentals -- Batman , the Joker , Freddie Krueger , the Phantom of the Opera and the Jason hockey mask -- are , for the most part , favorites at costume stores across the country . Batman outfits and accessories have gotten so hot that some retailers have accused higher-priced competitors of taking advantage of customers by charging whatever the market will bear . `` I realize that some places are getting into customers ' pocketbooks and gouging them , but we do n't do that , '' said Arlene Freed , manager of the Chickenshirt shop in Canoga Park 's Fallbrook Mall . Freed cited prices of up to $ 70 for rubber Batman masks at other West San Fernando Valley stores ; she sold out her stock for $ 45 apiece . ( Others in the costume business said the higher prices reflected , among other things , the cost of improved materials , shipping , licensing royalties and distributors ' charges . ) High prices and strong demand , however , have not translated into across-the-board profit increases for all retailers . Some costume and novelty shops say they have been pinched by the recent stepped-up competition by giant discount chains . Manufacturers have noticed signs of softening sales growth , too . Collegeville Flag & MFG. , a leading costume manufacturer in Collegeville , Pa. , passed along price increases of 8 % to 12 % this year . But the number of costumes it shipped was up only slightly , apparently in part because many of the newcomers to the business over-ordered last year , said Cindy Smith , the company 's sales manager . Beyond that , she said , no one is sure how long the giddy spending spree will last . `` You wonder how high it 's going to go , '' Smith said . `` Next year is someone going to pay $ 50 for a costume at a K mart or Target ? I just do n't know . ''