Love seen through a prism of nostalgic reverie creates the beauty of Truman Capote 's `` A Christmas Memory . '' It 's a wonderfully sentimental story that not only basks in the essence of the season but reminds us of what an affecting writer Capote could be , before the caricature of his personality obscured his talents . There 's admiration in the Alternative Repertory Theatre 's reading of `` A Christmas Memory , '' an appreciation of the written and spoken word that spirits the imagination in all of us . It 's this fondness that makes the experience at the tiny playhouse so touching . ART , a symbol of pluck on the Orange County theater scene if ever there was one , has often been knocked for failing to vivify the usually difficult plays it takes on , but that ca n't be applied here . Under Joel Cotter 's deft direction , Barbara Sorenson and Lee Clark personify the simple humanity of Capote 's story in pure ways . Clark is Buddy ( the 7-year-old Truman ) and Sorenson is a cousin in her 60s . Black sheep in a distracted , strait-laced family , they find joy and comfort when together . Their love justifies each other , especially during Christmas as they go about a fruitcake ritual , making then mailing them to presidents , postmen , strangers -- anybody who has struck their fancy during the year . Capote 's language is dear , delicate and without a trace of cynicism as he covers the mundane but illuminated events of the day . It 's a tale for children as well as adults : youngsters will enjoy the images of flying kites , ogre-like moonshiners and small-frame Christmas glory ; their parents will enjoy the intimacy of the emotions . Before `` A Christmas Memory , '' the troupe offers readings from six other holiday-oriented stories . It 's a welcome potpourri that veers from the arch sentimentality of O. Henry 's `` Gift of the Magi '' to `` The Indian Giver , '' Steve Martin 's parody of it . We also hear from Dickens ' ( `` Happy Happy Christmas '' ) , Clement Clarke Moore ( that old chestnut `` Visit From St. Nick '' ) , Jonathan Winters ( `` The Snowman '' ) and Jerry Gordon ( the finger-snapping beatnik ode , `` A Tomato Colored Headband '' ) . As with `` A Christmas Memory , '' the actors ( Amy Larson , Gary Christensen and Clark ) enliven the experience for us . You can feel good about this program , on all levels . Even the ticket price is appropriate -- your choice of toy donations for children , non-perishable foods for the homeless or any spare cash you might have to help out this always struggling theater . ' A CHRISTMAS MEMORY ' An Alternative Repertory Theatre reading of the Truman Capote story and other holiday tales . Directed by Joel Cotter . With Barbara Sorenson , Lee Clark , Amy Larson and Gary Christensen . Lighting by David C. Palmer . Sound by Gary Christensen . Plays Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m. and Sunday at 5 p.m. through Dec. 24. at 1636 S. Grand Ave. , Santa Ana . ( 714 ) 836-7929 .