Jennifer Kirk of Thousand Oaks is studying acting at Moorpark College because she wants to be effective in her efforts to educate the public on Tourette 's Syndrome and obsessive-compulsive behavior . Braden McKinley , the Ventura County district attorney 's top investigator , first studied drama because his 15-year-old daughter needed transportation to a night acting class . Nick Guastella of Simi Valley , a business major , is learning the fundamentals of the theater because he believes that in the corporate world , appearances are as important as financial acumen . Kirk , McKinley and Guastella are among a large group of people who shatter the myth that any Southern Californian taking an acting class harbors dreams of being the next Kevin Costner or Julia Roberts . People take acting classes for many reasons , said Katherine Lewis , who teaches drama at Moorpark College . Some -- such as Guastella -- have clearly defined professional goals : Lawyers use theatrical training to improve their chances of success in jury trials and psychologists to interact better with clients . `` Others might be there for therapy -- maybe in high school they were n't liked or they 're shy , '' Lewis said . Jay Varela , a drama instructor at Ventura College , said personal development is probably one of the most common motivations for taking his class , particularly at the beginning level . `` A lot of people take the class because they feel it will help them with their sense of self-confidence , '' he said . Suzanne Perez , a 24-year-old medical assistant who 's attending Moorpark College part time , said she is taking beginning acting because she believes that it will help her interact more effectively with patients and others . `` I thought it would help me be open , because I would n't be afraid of what people think of me , '' Perez , of Simi Valley , said . Guastella , also at Moorpark College , sees his beginning acting class as a steppingstone to success as he pursues a career as a financial analyst and corporate takeover artist . `` It 's helpful in dealing with people , '' he said . `` In business , a lot depends on appearances -- how you look and act . Donald Trump has created a character of himself that is bigger than life . '' Perhaps the most unusual reason for taking an acting class is offered by Kirk , who said she has both Tourette 's Syndrome and obsessive-compulsive disorder . The syndrome is a rare neurological disease with a variety of symptoms , including involuntary purposeless movements , swearing , tics and incoherent grunts and barks . Kirk said her case is mild , with physical tics and a tendency to clear her throat . And she said she is obsessive or compulsive about touching things or people . A liberal arts major at Moorpark , Kirk , 27 , wants to make a career on the professional lecture circuit and on television talking about the two disorders . In fact , she has already been on `` The Today Show '' and said she is very comfortable in front of audiences . `` When I get up on stage I 'm fine because I 'm concentrating on something I enjoy , '' she said . Varela believes drama classes can be particularly helpful for people with disabilities , and their participation in the course is of value to the other students . `` We 've got disabled people , deaf people , a student with a spinal injury who has taught us a lot about how to focus because it 's so difficult for him to move , '' Varela said . The student with the spinal injury recently did a scene in which he played a farmer being pressured by a salesman to sell his land . The scene required him to take oranges out of a box . `` The way he was doing it was so compelling , '' Varela said . `` He did it much more slowly and with tremendous commitment to each gesture . '' At the same time , the class is helping the student in his determined fight to gain independence , Varela said . Lewis believes that theatrical training is valuable no matter what field a student is pursuing . `` I think there are many professional areas that require people to be persuasive speakers , '' she said . `` I feel that acting should be a requirement like speech is . `` There 's getting up in front of people with their cards and boring people , or getting up before people and appealing to them emotionally , '' she added . `` People are not just moved by reason . They 're moved by emotion . '' McKinley has found that to be true in his job as chief investigator with the Ventura County district attorney 's office . `` Acting can really help an executive who gives presentations or conducts meetings , '' the 48-year-old Ventura resident said . `` The fundamentals of acting are just like the fundamentals of life . '' But unlike students who have taken drama classes for reasons other than a career in film or on stage , McKinley harbors Hollywood ambitions . A career law enforcement officer who had dabbled a little in high school and church theatrical productions , McKinley fell into taking drama last spring when his teen-age daughter Julie signed up for a night class at Ventura College . Since he had to drive her to campus , he decided to take the class with her . He loved his class , got a part in the college 's summer production of `` The Fantasticks '' and was hooked . Since then , he has performed in the Plaza Players ' production of `` Bent '' in Ventura and will play the lead role in the `` Romantic Comedy , '' which opens New Year 's Eve . He is considering trying out for commercials or television . `` I 'm not foolish enough to think I could support myself or put my kids through college on my acting ability alone , '' he said . `` But it 's a great diversion from a very stressful job I have now . ''