In a `` no-holds-barred exchange , '' Richard M. Nixon today told Deng Xiaoping that some Chinese leaders have lost respect in the United States , and Deng accused Washington of involvement in the democracy movement that China 's army crushed in June . China 's 85-year-old senior leader told the former President that `` China has not done one single thing harmful to the United States '' in the last decade , the New China News Agency reported . A member of the Nixon party who attended the meeting between Deng and the American leader who opened the door to China in 1972 characterized their conversation as a `` a very tough , no-holds-barred exchange . '' Nixon also spoke with Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin about the `` tragedy '' of the military crackdown on student-led dissent , the American informant said . Nixon told Deng that he had observed relations closely for 17 years and that `` there has never been a more difficult crisis than at the present time . '' He said it is important to discuss differences and `` repair the damage that has been done to the respect in the United States among China 's friends for some of China 's leaders . '' He did not identify those leaders . Deng , Premier Li Peng and President Yang Shangkun have been singled out for ordering the June attack on pro-democracy demonstrators in which hundreds , perhaps thousands , of people were killed . Deng charged that the United States `` was involved too deeply in the turmoil and counterrevolutionary rebellion , '' the government 's terms for the democracy movement . `` China was the real victim , and it is unjust to reprove China for it , '' he said . Deng and Nixon , who was on the fourth day of a private visit , agreed that ideological differences should be overcome and relations improved on the basis of common strategic interests . `` I 'm very much in favor of your view regarding state-to-state relations , '' Deng said to Nixon as they met at the Great Hall of the People . `` You should focus on the strategic interests of a country , and you should not talk about historical roots or differences in ideology or the strength of a country . '' Nixon has urged the governments to bury their differences over the crushing of dissent and mend their frayed relations .