Second-year water polo Coach Steve Heaston knew success , having spent eight seasons as an assistant at California , the last two with national champions . But when he replaced highly regarded Pete Cutino as head coach last season , he saw Cal blow a one-goal lead in the last quarter of the NCAA championship game and lose to UC Irvine . In the 1990 final against Stanford Sunday night at the Belmont Plaza Pool in Long Beach , Heaston said he thought history was going to repeat . But three saves by part-time goalie Jim Wagner in the final 90 seconds enabled Cal to stave off a furious comeback try by Stanford and preserve an 8-7 victory . Cal won its ninth national title . `` When the fourth quarter started I had a big lump in my throat , '' Heaston said . `` ( My assistant coach ) and I looked at each other and said , 'this ca n't happen again . ' `` It might have , without Wagner . Stanford , employing a defense that forced the Golden Bears to shoot from outside , had begun to build momentum after Cal took a 7-3 lead with 5:36 left in the third quarter . Stanford 's Greg Morris scored 1:14 into the final period to cut Cal 's lead to 8-7 . With 1:32 left , Wagner blocked a shot by Stanford 's J.T . Matarangas . Eight seconds later , Wagner knocked a shot by Colin Keely away from the net , and with 1:05 to go , he blocked another shot from the hole by Matarangas . Rick McNair of Stanford rebounded and fired a shot off the post of the cage . Greg Olson of Stanford grabbed the ball , but Wagner knocked it out of his hand and Cal controlled . Cal 's Chris Humbert , voted the tournament 's most valuable player said : `` Overall , the game was sloppy . It was nothing to be proud of , but we got out of it with a win and that 's all that counts . '' The teams committed 17 turnovers . `` Horrible , '' Heaston said . `` We had a couple of big misses -- you know , the excitement -- and we got tight . But , maybe after all we have been through , maybe a little luck does n't hurt . '' This was the fifth victory by Cal ( 29-1 ) over Stanford ( 26-6 ) this year . In other matches : UCLA raced to an 8-3 lead and defeated UC Santa Barbara , 15-8 , to take third place . The victory was the final for Bruin Coach Bob Horn , who announced his retirement Saturday night . Pepperdine 's Eric Wood and Steve Long scored four goals apiece to lead the Waves over Air Force , 16-13 , for fifth place . Navy broke a 5-5 tie with two goals in the final quarter and then held off Brown , 7-6 , for seventh place .