A team of medical experts at UCLA Medical Center has rejected a request to give an Anaheim man a heart transplant , saying that despite an operation , the patient would probably not live past one year . In a written statement prepared by UCLA staff , Dr. Lynne Warner Stevenson said that the team of 20 heart-transplant specialists has determined that Hector Bojado , 29 , was not a suitable candidate for a donor heart . `` Based on medical and psychological evaluation , Mr. Bojado has not been accepted as a candidate for transplantation , '' according to the prepared statement . `` He is in fair condition and efforts are being made at this time to identify a combination of oral medication that would allow him to return home , '' the statement continued . From his hospital bed at UCLA on Saturday night , Bojado , who was having trouble breathing , said only that he felt `` very sick '' and would speak with reporters when he felt better . Bojado , an indigent , was transferred to UCLA Medical Center on Nov. 21 , after administrators at UCI Medical Center in Orange said that they could not perform a heart transplant there unless Bojado put up a $ 50,000 deposit , an additional $ 30,000 within three months and $ 70,000 more in two years . The hospital 's auxiliary had been desperately trying to raise money both for Bojado and for Stephen Regalado , 23 , of Mission Viejo , also a heart patient without enough money to pay for a transplant . Regalado died Oct. 30 . Those working on Bojado 's behalf , when the fund raising fell short , turned to Hoag Hospital in Newport Beach for help , and Hoag administrators offered to perform the expensive operation . But Dr. Richard Ott , UCI 's director of cardiac transplantation , said at the time that UCLA was better equipped to deal with Bojado 's rapidly deteriorating condition . The move to UCLA would also allow Bojado , a plastics molder from Anaheim , to apply for Medi-Cal insurance . Hoag spokeswoman Pam Bolen said Saturday that she did not know if the hospital 's offer is still open . Hospital administrators closer to the case could not be reached for comment . Tests on Bojado since his admission to UCLA have suggested that Bojado `` is at a high risk for poor outcome following heart transplantation , '' the UCLA statement says . `` While it is expected that Mr. Bojado would have good outcome during the early post-operative period , '' wrote Stevenson , head of the medical team evaluating Bojado , `` the predicted outcome beyond the first year is not good . '' In the release , Stevenson defended the results by saying that the evaluation was based on `` nationally accepted criteria established by heart transplant programs throughout the United States . '' Each year , more than 200 patients are evaluated for possible heart transplants , the UCLA statement says . The UCLA Medical Center , the statement continued , accepts between 30 and 50 heart transplant candidates a year .