It 's only the first week of league play , but it 's already rush hour in the City Eastern League . Three teams are in a bottleneck jockeying to take the lead , and one will give ground today when the annual Point Loma-Mira Mesa rivalry resumes at Point Loma ( 3 p.m. ) . Both teams are undefeated -- Mira Mesa is 5-0 , Point Loma 4-0 -- as is Morse ( 5-0 ) . Morse , ranked No . 1 in the county , plays at 2-A Kearny tonight and is favored to win . For Mira Mesa , ranked No . 2 , or Point Loma , No . 3 , a victory today is a prerequisite for winning the league title . Last year , Point Loma pulled out a 27-24 victory when quarterback Danny White converted on fourth-and-10 to sustain a scoring drive late in the fourth quarter . White is gone , and so too is most of the offense at Point Loma . The Pointers have scored only 60 points , averaging 15 per game . But their defense has recorded two shutouts ( against Lincoln and El Camino ) and allowed only seven points each to No . 4 Helix and No . 5 Rancho Buena Vista . `` So far , our defense has out-shown our offense , '' Point Loma Coach Bennie Edens said . `` We have good speed ( on defense ) , we hit hard and have some outstanding football players . '' Two stand out . They are defensive ends and brothers , LaRoi ( 6-feet-2 , 265 pounds ) and Darcel Glover ( 6-2 , 220 ) . They are the reason teams ca n't run against the Point Loma defense . Today , the Pointers will attempt to stop the two-pronged attack of Wayne Pittman ( 71 carries , 884 yards ) and Robby Edwards ( 52 carries , 493 yards ) . And despite his team 's success against the run , Edens said he remains concerned with these two , especially Pittman . `` He 's a Division I running back , '' Edens said . `` If you 're going to stop him , you better play good defense , have strong pursuit and a lot of people in the area . '' But if Pittman breaks through for even one touchdown , it could put the game out of reach for Point Loma . That 's because Point Loma 's young offense will continue its learning process against the No . 1-ranked defense in the county . Mira Mesa has allowed only 10 points in five games and recorded three shutouts . The rub against Mira Mesa is that it has yet to play a ranked team . Until today .