A marine biologist diving near Santa Catalina Island was startled to find an unfamiliar off-white-colored starfish usually indigenous to the tropical waters of South America . Near Point Loma in San Diego , the waters are providing a unique harvest of such exotic species as yellowfin tuna and dorado , prompting commercial fisherman Lance Withee to say he has `` never seen the ocean like this before . '' And for surfers at Newport Beach , swimming trunks often replace the full-body wet suit , normally de rigueur as Southern California moves into the winter . Warmer-than-average ocean temperatures off Southern California -- as much as 10 degrees above normal on a given day -- are intriguing scientists , fascinating fishermen and delighting surfers from Santa Barbara to Mexico . Researchers at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in La Jolla say monthly average temperatures since June have topped normal temperatures by as much as five degrees . The highest readings occurred in July . `` We 're really excited about it , '' said Orange Coast College marine biologist Dennis Kelly , who has heard reports of unusual sea turtles and other warm-water creatures as close as four miles to Newport Pier . `` It opens up a lot of doors for us for research . '' No one is quite sure why the tropical-like waters have pushed ocean temperatures up . And scientists are less willing to predict what the trend could mean for the future . `` It 's a big ocean out there , '' said biological oceanographer John McGowan , a member of the Scripps Climate Research Division . `` There is so much going on that we just ca n't see . '' Some specialists suggest a shift in wind patterns may be the cause . Others point to a change in an ocean current . Still others are concerned that the warm water may be a harbinger of El Nino , a Pacific Ocean weather pattern that causes severe drought in some areas of the Pacific Rim and devastating storms in others . Southern California has experienced a slackening of strong westerly winds , which normally blow across the ocean and churn the deeper , colder water . The resulting `` upwelling '' cools the shallower warm water . Without the wind , the upper layer of ocean water becomes tepid -- an explanation offered by Newport Beach Marine Safety officer Gordon C. Reed . `` We 've had little wind to speak of this year , '' he said . But others suggest that the warming is the result of an errant current that is also dragging to the Southern California coastline an array of exotic marine life . Marine biologist Jeff Landsman , with the Cabrillo Marine Museum in San Pedro , said that he and other researchers have noted unusual ocean life that seems to be associated with the warm water . Thousands of South American Humboldt squid were beached near San Onofre in the summer , he said . Another striking example was the discovery of the starfish , a Tamaria obstipa , off Catalina by Landsman 's colleague , Lloyd Ellis . The creature is native to coastal waters off Peru . Finds like that have prompted Landsman and other scientists to conclude that the warmer-than-normal water might be the result of an off-season flow of the Davidson Countercurrent , which pushes water northward from Baja California in February . `` There 's too much out there to believe that it 's just the lack of winds , '' Landsman said . `` I do n't believe that it 's upwelling that is causing this . '' Whatever the reason , the tropical-like waters have been a boon to such beachgoers as 19-year-old Jason Smith , an avid Newport Beach surfer . On a recent day his wet suit lay unused nearby . `` You do n't even need the suit , '' said his 18-year-old friend , Rip Arenz . `` Yeah , the water is really warm . I do n't know why . '' And sportfishermen are enjoying the bounty . Withee , who owns and operates the Vagabond , an 80-foot sportfishing boat out of Point Loma , said he has caught tropical fish without having to travel hundreds of miles south . `` It 's never before been like this , '' Withee said . `` We 've had a long bite of exotic species out there . '' Withee and other fishermen say that dorado are normally caught during a two-week period in August . But since May , they have been bringing on board hundreds of the iridescent , blue-and-green fish each day . Fishermen also report higher than normal concentrations of yellowtail tuna . Zeke Grader , executive director for the Sausalito-based Pacific Coast Federation of Fishermen 's Associations , said the catches are helping the $ 1.5-billion commercial fishing industry as well as sports fishermen . But Grader said that if the unseasonably warm temperatures continue , important colder-water fish may be driven away . For example , experts say a small squid that spawns off Santa Catalina Island in the winter would be threatened by the warmer water . `` It 's hard to say whether we are looking at something unusual , '' Grader said , `` but we 're watching very carefully the water conditions . '' Grader said that the last time warm water hurt the fishing industry was in 1982-83 , when a strong El Nino -- the worst such weather system in the century -- devastated the salmon harvest . Scripps researchers said that fears of an impending El Nino are ill-placed . Nick Graham , part of a team studying the phenomenon , said the earliest an El Nino could form would be next year . Scripps ' McGowan also said the warm waters do not appear to be a sign that an El Nino is beginning . Absent are other signs of the phenomenon -- called the El Nino-Southern Oscillation , or ENSO -- which are found in the equatorial and eastern Pacific regions . For an El Nino to take place , Graham said , barometric pressure in the area of Darwin , Australia , must rise and pressure over Tahiti must fall . Neither condition has occurred . In addition , El Nino is associated with increased rainfall in the central equatorial Pacific , elevated sea surface temperatures from South America to the international date line and weaker easterly winds along the Equator , Graham said . `` We do n't have all the ( other ) danger signals yet , '' McGowan said . `` They are just not all in place . ''