Somewhere in Nashville , there may well be a record promoter or marketing specialist who grimaces whenever K.D . Lang 's voice filters through the air . The singing itself would n't be to blame for the sour look on the hypothetical country music insider 's face . That would be impossible , since Lang possesses one of the most confident , presence-filled and unambiguously splendid voices in pop music today . No -- the grimace and sideways head shake would come from the thought of how out-of-sync the woman behind the voice is with the country music image machinery , and how much more money she might generate if she could only be made to fit a more readily salable mold . If Lang 's voice came in a conventionally glamorous sweetheart-of-the-rodeo package , there is a strong possibility that country superstardom would be hers . But instead of feminine cowgirl dresses , flowing tresses and the other trappings usually associated with country divas , Lang favors an androgynous , short-haired appearance closer to punk-influenced alternative-rock fashion than to Nashville 's idea of how a star attraction should look . `` I 'm sure Nashville would want to see me go country , '' Lang , who plays Tuesday night at the Celebrity Theatre with her band , the Reclines , said in a recent phone interview . `` If I abided by their rules , they 're sure I could sell a lot of records . They 'd like to see me co-write with a Nashville songwriter , and have a contemporary Nashville producer produce me in Nashville . They 're very incestuous . '' Not that Lang 's music has been a commercial flop . Her current album , `` Absolute Torch and Twang '' had a solid run in the Top 20 on the country album charts , and it broke into the Top 100 on the Billboard pop album chart . Lang 's music shows fealty to country 's musical traditions with swinging honky-tonk stylings and spacious , big-sky atmospherics full of sighing steel guitars . But on a song like `` It 's Me , '' from `` Absolute Torch and Twang , '' she uses country musical conventions to declare her independence from conventional Nashville style : Might not be all you want But it 's all you get , it 's me . On them shiny pages , all that hairdo It ai n't me . `` I 'm not averse to the style of Dolly Parton , but I have to be natural to myself to put the best art out that I can , '' Lang said . `` If ( listeners ) do n't accept the way I look , they 'll never understand the music totally . '' Image may be the most apparent way Lang , 28 , differs from performers working comfortably within the country music system . The differences that crop up in her music are subtler . Lang and the Reclines ' first major-label album , `` Angel With a Lariat , '' had elements of kitsch and spoof in its rambunctious , rock-flavored assault on country style . Still , the excellence of the singing and playing made it obvious that the musicians also had serious regard for country music . In 1988 , Lang answered any questions about how authentically interested she was in being a country singer by recording `` Shadowland , '' a tribute to the classic Patsy Cline sound in which she teamed with Cline 's original producer , Owen Bradley . With `` Absolute Torch and Twang , '' Lang said , `` I sort of marked my coming of age as a songwriter and an artist with her own direction -- being rid of the Patsy Cline obsession , and coming into her own style . '' Hearing Cline 's music at the age of 20 had a near-mystical effect on Lang , who was raised in the tiny town of Consort , Alberta . Performance art was Lang 's genre when she came across Cline as a result of playing a country singer in a musical in Edmonton . Cline 's music struck her so deeply that Lang began to entertain mystical thoughts that she and the late country star might be spiritually linked . For the first time , Lang considered country music as a creative outlet . `` I was a performance artist . I was at totally the opposite end of ( the spectrum from ) country music . For me to explain country to my art friends was kind of scary . They said , 'Yeah , you 're going to make fun of it , right ? ' I said , 'Yeah , kind of , but not totally . ' I have this kitsch side of me , but I also have respect for it . '' With `` Shadowland '' and now `` Absolute Torch and Twang , '' Lang dispensed with the kitsch and positioned herself as an unabashed country singer . But if Lang seems comfortable enough now with country as a form to use it straightforwardly , she also has an idea of how to work subtle changes that give it her own outsider 's stamp . Some of her songs include touches of abstraction and unorthodox word placement -- self-consciously artful elements that depart from country 's usual directness and colloquial , conversational style . In `` Nowhere to Stand , '' a song about child abuse , Lang takes what would be a reverential catch phrase in most country songwriting -- `` a family tradition , the strength of this land '' -- and twists it around to deeply ironic effect . By labeling child-battering `` a family tradition , the strength of this land , '' Lang obliquely calls into question the sentimental , uncritical attitude that runs through much of the Nashville establishment when it comes to the portrayal of traditional values . From that conservative viewpoint , such buzzwords as `` family , '' `` tradition '' and `` strength of this land '' would represent something inviolable . But Lang 's song makes the point that a tradition such as unchallenged parental authority can foster evil from generation to generation . Lang 's mixture of reverence and restlessness for traditional country forms leaves it open as to where she will go next with her music . `` We 're six months into a one-year tour , so I kind of have blinders on till the end of May , '' she said . `` I 'd really like to be on Broadway . I 'd love to do `` Annie Get Your Gun . '' But I think my ultimate goal is to be established as a songwriter and be known for developing my own style as a singer . '' Lang said she handpicked her opening act , Ranch Romance , an unsigned , all-female group from Seattle that she describes as `` sort of like the Roches meets Sons of the Pioneers . They opened for me in Seattle , and I fell in love with their sound . '' K.D . Lang & the Reclines and Ranch Romance play Tuesday at 7:30 p.m. at the Celebrity Theatre , 201 E. Broadway in Anaheim . Tickets : $ 20 . Information : ( 714 ) 999-9536 .