You ca n't call a spade a spade even if you want to . Fact is , you ca n't tell one from a club ( though you could probably spot a heart or a diamond if push came to shove ) . You want to enjoy card games -- no , you want to be able to tolerate card games , and you live in fear of the day when Genevieve Bujold invites you to her place for a game of strip poker . `` I do n't play cards , ma cherie , '' you will have to tell her and spend the rest of your days in self-loathing . Your sense of inadequacy is only compounded by the knowledge that all great writers , at one time or another , have tasted the fruits of the deck in an all-night card-playing debauch . So you face the prospect of a bridge lesson with a deep sense of foreboding . So much hangs in the balance , more than your well-meaning editor could ever have known when she gave you this assignment . Still , maybe this time you will feel the magic . Maybe you will face the demon and emerge , bloodied but triumphant . But you 're not taking any chances . No , you need all the help you can get . So you march straight to the video store and rent `` Play Bridge With Omar Sharif . '' You take the tape home and , while quietly whistling `` Lara 's Theme , '' pop it into your new VCR . Old Omar , still dashing , sets the tone nicely . `` I have played bridge with royalty and with cabinet ministers , '' he says , confiding how he used to play bridge on the set with Sophia Loren . He let her win , he says , because he knew she hated to lose . His eyes twinkle mischievously , and you begin to think that maybe you 've waited too long to learn this game . You are wrong . You should have waited longer . `` Now , through the electronic miracle of the videocassette , '' Sharif says , `` you will be my partner in the world 's most fascinating card game . . . . '' You remember nothing from that moment on , save a few colorful terms , like trick , no-trump , slam and rubber . And so you arrive at the Hueneme Bay Bridge Club with your sense of foreboding intact . Will you get trumped here , among these 20 or so active seniors ? Will you be forced to play a rubber or pick up tricks ? Not if you can help it ; a reporter can only be expected to go so far in the line of duty . Your instructor , Pat Perkins , tries to make you feel at home among her students , both beginners and intermediate players . She tells you that she grew up in Texas . `` My father played cards , though some people thought he should n't have , '' she says . `` The Southern Baptists called cards the 'pasteboards of the devil , ' so we used to play with the shades drawn . '' Perkins stands before a chalkboard filled with strange symbols . `` Tonight 's lesson is on the response to an opening no-trump bid , '' she says , and you begin to wonder why seemingly nice people say such things . But it 's time to play bridge . You 've been placed at the beginners ' table and , since four women are already there , you double up with one of them . All your table mates have been here a couple of times before , so they 're only moderately green . They seem concerned about your comprehension of the game , and you do n't want to disappoint them . Quickly you master the dual-pronged technique of : a ) looking like you understand and , b ) asking seemingly intelligent questions . For example , your partner says to you , `` If you win a trick , you put your cards down vertically . If you lose , you lay them horizontally . '' You nod knowingly , rub your chin and ask , `` Is that standard operating procedure in duplicate as well as in rubber bridge ? '' They 're impressed . You 're pretty sure they would have been less impressed had you asked the question that was really on your mind : What on earth is a trick ? After a half-dozen or so brain-numbing hands , you decide to take an inventory of what you 've learned so far about the world 's most fascinating card game . You scribble the following in your notebook : 1 . The art is in the bidding . 2 . The dealer always opens . 3 . An ace is worth 4 points , a king is 3 , a queen is 2 and a jack is 1 . Thus assured that the evening has not been a total loss , you approach Perkins and ask her the question that has gnawed at you since your game with Omar Sharif . `` Why do people play bridge ? '' Perkins says she plays for the intellectual stimulation and the challenge . `` It 's good for older people because it gives them something to do , '' she says . `` When you start to lose more of your memory than you 'd like to , it 's good for you . It helps keep you alert . '' Maybe she 's got something there , you say to yourself , and resolve to give the game another try -- in about 35 years . THE PREMISE There are plenty of things you have never tried . Fun things , dangerous things , character building things . The Reluctant Novice tries them for you and reports the results . This week 's Reluctant Novice is free-lance writer Steve Keeva .