For forest rangers at Mt . Pinos , north of Ojai , poachers who steal fir trees from the wooded federal lands are about as welcome as coal in a Christmas stocking . But every holiday season thieves put a damper on the rangers ' Christmas by taking young white firs from the forest for use as Christmas trees . The tree rustlers might be trying to save money . Or they might think that the trees wo n't be missed . Whatever the reason , forest rangers are seeing red . `` What they are taking is not so much a commodity but something that is high in value in the recreational sense , '' said Forest Service Officer John Kelly at the Mt . Pinos ranger station . One Forest Service officer said thieves steal 20 to 30 fir and pine trees every year . But with only six federal employees to keep watch over the 500,000-acre Mt . Pinos reserve in the Los Padres National Forest , at the northern end of Ventura County , it is difficult to catch the culprits . `` They go to the side of the roads and you can tell where they cut the trees , '' Kelly said . `` But from a law enforcement standpoint , it is really hit-and-miss . '' Don Trammell , a recreation and operations officer at Mt . Pinos , said Forest Service officers catch about two tree rustlers a year . The penalty for taking one tree is usually a $ 50 fine , but it can be as much as $ 5,000 and can include one year in custody , depending on the circumstances , he said . Two years ago , Forest Service officials caught a thief who was trying to make off with 15 to 20 white firs in the back of a van , Trammell said . He said the suspect faced a fine and incarceration and was brought before a federal magistrate , but left the country soon after the arraignment hearing . The tree-stealing incidents are not confined to Mt . Pinos . Forest Service officials have reported a problem with tree poachers at Angeles and San Bernardino national forests . Forests in Northern California have also had their share of tree thieves through the years . In Southern California , tree smuggling is considered a particularly serious offense because of the relative scarcity of evergreen trees and the stressful conditions -- such as diseases , insects and smog -- they face . Most of the 2 million acres that make up Los Padres National Forest are within Ventura County . The white fir and the Jeffrey and pinon pine trees , however , are most abundant in the high altitudes of Mt . Pinos , Forest Service officers said . Because of their fullness and shape , Kelly said the white firs are the most desirable trees around Christmas . `` White fir is a really highly sought-after Christmas tree , '' Joe Krueger , a Mt . Pinos forester , said . The federal reserve on the Kern County border is populated mostly with pine trees , he said . White firs make up a smaller portion of the forest , Kelly said . There are several residential neighborhoods and a lake resort scattered throughout the wooded federal lands , Kelly said . Mt . Pinos firefighter Jamie Moore said thieves have been known to climb tall firs and saw the top halves of the trees . Usually , these trees die because they 're vulnerable to a species of wood-munching beetle , she said . In an effort to cut down on thefts , Forest Service officials five years ago began to set aside wooded areas where families from nearby communities can cut pine trees for a $ 2 permit . The sites designated for the Christmas tree harvests are usually in areas where densely populated pine trees must be thinned to improve the future health and vigor of the forest , Kelly said . The forest , however , can only spare 300 to 400 pine trees each year , he said . `` We try not to publicize it too much because we do n't want the demand to far outstrip the supply , '' Kelly said . Last year , Forest Service officials began a program of allowing families to return Christmas trees after the holidays so they can be used as habitat for forest wildlife . The trees are put in areas where shelter for squirrels , birds , chipmunks and mice is needed . Despite the annual harvest , people continue to steal fir trees from other areas of the forest , Kelly said . `` They are taking something away from the forest that is really aesthetically pleasing , '' he said .