Ruth Washington , publisher of the Los Angeles Sentinel , once the second-largest black newspaper in the United States , died Friday of cancer . She was 76 . Mrs. Washington , who 16 years ago succeeded her husband as publisher , died in the Hollywood Presbyterian Hospital Chalet after a long hospitalization . `` Although we were aware that Mrs. Washington was gravely ill , her death has still left us all in the state of shock and grief , '' Sentinel Chief Executive Officer Kenneth Thomas said . `` Indeed , the news of her passing has sent shock waves throughout the entire black community of Los Angeles and the newspaper industry as well . '' The Sentinel , which has slipped in recent years to a circulation of about 25,000 from its peak of 56,000 in the 1960s , was founded in 1933 by civil rights activist Leon Washington , who married Mrs. Washington in 1940 . She was given some control over the paper when he suffered a stroke in 1948 , later served as business manager when he returned to the helm and was named publisher after her husband died in 1974 of another stroke . `` I always say that the Sentinel is like a family , '' Mrs. Washington told The Times in 1981 . `` By that I mean it belongs to us and it belongs to the people , just like a child belongs to a family . That 's what makes it such a beautiful paper . '' While assisting her husband , and in her role as publisher , Mrs. Washington became the matriarch of black society in Los Angeles . She made sure the paper was a place where blacks could turn for steady coverage of community-oriented programs , fund-raisers and social events , even as blacks continued to move from the inner city and integration reduced circulation . `` Her whole existence is that L.A. Sentinel . That is her life 's work , '' Sentinel executive Thomas told The Times several years ago . Along with Ethel Bradley , wife of Los Angeles Mayor Tom Bradley , and legislator Maxine Waters , Mrs. Washington was a co-founder of the Black Women 's Forum . She also was a major fund-raiser for the 28th Street/Crenshaw YMCA . At the newspaper 's East 43rd Street plant , more than 1,000 honorary plaques and certificates were displayed and stacked in her office , presented to the paper for its longstanding advocacy of civil rights . `` We 've tried to do exactly for the community what Mr. Washington would have wanted us to do , '' Mrs. Washington said . `` That 's what keeps us going . '' In the mid-1960s , Mrs. Washington attempted to ease the youth-gang problems in South-Central Los Angeles by meeting with gang members and inviting them to express their views in the Sentinel . Mrs. Washington tenaciously retained control of the newspaper despite a bitter 13-year probate court battle by her husband 's sister and illegitimate son -- his only child -- to wrest it from her . Her husband 's will had bequeathed to her 80 % of the newspaper 's stock , leaving 20 % to his sister , Juanita Goodman , and son , Lynn Washington . The two attempted to oust Mrs. Washington as administrator of her husband 's estate , charging , among other things , that her stewardship had hurt the price of the stock . In 1983 , struggling with mounting debts for the weekly paper , Mrs. Washington placed her longtime attorney , Thomas , in control . He agreed to pay the debts and keep the paper afloat . As part of the deal , she received a lifetime contract as publisher and some income from real estate . Leon Washington 's sister and son were unhappy with the arrangement . They wanted the paper sold . In 1987 , Los Angeles Superior Court Judge Ronald E. Swearinger resolved the dispute , ruling that Mrs. Washington had rightfully inherited the paper and could legally do with it as she wished . The paper remained under Thomas ' control as chief executive officer -- with her as publisher . A native of Salina , Kan. , she was trained in business and operated a photography studio before joining her husband at the Sentinel . Mrs. Washington is survived by one sister , Bernadette Plummer of Portland , Ore. , three nieces and four nephews . The Sentinel will present a tribute to Mrs. Washington at 11 a.m. today in the Century Plaza Hotel , during its previously planned annual holiday bazaar .