Merv Rettenmund , the man who blamed himself for the Oakland Athletics ' offensive woes during the World Series , was hired Wednesday as the Padre hitting coach , replacing Jack Maloof . The move leaves Rob Picciolo , first-base coach , as the only member of the Padre 1990 coaching staff who definitely will be retained , Manager Greg Riddoch said . The fate of bullpen coach Denny Sommers has yet to be determined , Riddoch said , but sources in baseball said that the Padres have contacted other candidates about the position . The Padres also have hired Tom Gamboa , former director of field operations for the Detroit Tigers , to be their minor league field coordinator . Gamboa , who took over as manager at triple-A Toledo in mid-season , currently is managing in Mayaguez , Puerto Rico . Rettenmund , 47 , joins the Padres after spending the past five years with the Athletics , three years as their roving hitting instructor in the minor leagues , and the past two seasons as their major league hitting coach . `` This is a job I 've wanted for a number of years , '' said Rettenmund , who played in 1976 and 1977 for the Padres , and lives year-round in Rancho Bernardo . `` I said for years this would be the only place I 'd leave the A 's for . `` But this has been a tough year for me . There have been times this year when I had to practice smiling . There were times this year when I felt like we lost 100 games , rather than winning 100 games . '' When you happen to be hitting coach of the Athletics , a team filled with such All-Stars as Jose Canseco , Rickey Henderson , Mark McGwire , nothing less than perfection is expected . When the Athletics scored 733 runs ( ranked third ) and batted .254 ( ranked 12th ) during the regular season , it just was n't good enough . And when they scored only eight runs in five World Series games , Rettenmund knew there might be changes . `` To tell you the truth , '' Rettenmund said , `` I do n't know whether I 'd be brought back or not . When I told Tony ( La Russa , Athletic manager ) about this opportunity , all he told me was do anything that will make you happy . '' So imagine Rettenmund 's delight when he returned home from the Athletics ' organizational meetings last week in Scottsdale , Ariz. , and there was a message on his answering message from Joe McIlvaine , Padre executive vice president/general manager . He asked Rettenmund if he was interested in the job , and , if so , ask the Athletics for permission to leave , and contact Manager Greg Riddoch . Rettenmund received permission , took a flight Sunday to Denver to meet with Riddoch , arrived back in San Diego on Monday , and was offered the job on Tuesday . And moments after he accepted , Maloof was receiving a call at his Chandler , Ariz. , home , telling him that his services no longer are needed . Maloof , the 29th member of the Padre front-office or coaching staff who has been fired since Sept. 21 , was told that he can remain in the organization in 1991 , but he would be assigned as hitting coach of their double-A Wichita team . Maloof said that he will remain with the Padres only as a last resort , and is seeking employment elsewhere . The Padres batted .254 and scored 325 runs after the All-Star break when Maloof was hired , a dropoff from the first half when the Padres batted .262 and scored 348 runs under batting coach Amos Otis . `` It was a very hard situation to work in , '' Maloof said , `` and I knew that all along . I was given an opportunity , as short-lived as it was , but I sure would have liked to have a full season to show what I could do . `` I would have at least liked to have interviewed for the job with Joe McIlvaine , but I never got the opportunity . I was told the job was mine unless they found someone who they thought was more qualified , and more capable . `` I guess when you have a chance to get someone from the Oakland A 's organization , and have some immediate credibility , you go do it . You ca n't blame them for that . `` I just wish I had a chance , that 's all . ''