Vasco da Gama and Ferdinand Magellan may seem unlikely rivals for Donald Duck and Mickey Mouse . But under an ambitious plan by a group of U.S. businessmen , the 15th-Century Portuguese explorers could vie with Walt Disney stars as major European theme park attractions . A U.S.-owned company , backed by the Portuguese government , is planning an $ 80-million to $ 100-million theme park near Lisbon , based on the pioneering Portuguese sea voyages to Africa , Asia and the New World some 500 years ago . The Lusolandia park is set for a 1993 opening , one year after the scheduled launch of a Euro Disneyland park in France . Lusolandia Holdings chairman Edward Kane , a Boston native , said the project sprang from Disney 's rejection five years ago of an idea from then-Portuguese Prime Minister Mario Soares to locate a European Disneyland in Portugal . As Lisbon representative of the Washington-based International Trade and Guarantee Corp. , a company advising U.S. businesses abroad , Kane had been asked by Soares -- currently Portuguese president -- to approach Disney . `` Walt Disney Enterprises basically said no way , Portugal is too small potatoes for them , '' Kane said . Disney decided to locate closer to Europe 's more affluent and densely populated `` golden triangle '' formed by London , Paris and Brussels . Their French amusement park program foresees costs of up to $ 2.8 billion to 1997 . After Disney 's refusal , Kane turned to Management Resources , an Anaheim company specializing in creating and running theme parks and formed by ex-Disney employees . `` I had the idea of . . . instead of Mickey Mouse and Donald Duck . . . let 's make it a Portuguese historical theme park , let 's replace Donald Duck with Bartolomeu Dias and Mickey Mouse with Vasco da Gama , '' said Kane , a retired U.S. foreign service officer . Portuguese authorities backed the plan , and Mangagement Resources enthusiastically joined the project . Feasibility studies predicted 2.15 million first-year customers from Portugal 's 10 million inhabitants and foreign visitors to Portugal who last year topped 16 million . The park is to be built near the town of Azambuja , 28 miles northeast of Lisbon along the main north-south freeway to Oporto , Portugal 's second largest city . Kane said the park will also have good road links to Portugal 's main tourist destination -- the southern Algarve region -- and to neighboring Spain . The site proposed for a new Lisbon international airport is seven miles to the east of the park location . Visitors will enter the 247-acre park into a mock-up of Renaissance Lisbon , complete with castle and 15th-Century main street . From a reconstructed quay , replicas of the explorers ' caravels will carry would-be Magellans on a voyage of discovery across an artificial lake to `` theme areas '' representing Brazilian jungles , mysterious African kingdoms and the glittering civilizations of India , China and Japan . Kane said the latest technology will be used to create a have-fun-as-you-learn environment for adults and children . The park publicity brochure promises ocean storms and Amazonian canoe trips as well as cultural exhibits highlighting lands along the Portuguese sea routes . Portuguese historians will advise on the park 's authenticity and experts from other countries will be contacted to set up Japanese teahouses and African dance displays . Lusolandia Holdings is registered in Bermuda and owned 50-50 by Management Resources and International Trade and Guarantee Corp . Soon , Kane said , they will be joined by a Portuguese partner and create a Portuguese company -- Lusolandia Empreedimentos Turisticas . Private financing for the project is being sought mainly in Europe . Kane also hopes to gain Portuguese government funding and is discussing loan prospects with the Luxembourg-based European Investment Bank . The Portuguese government has created a special task force of officials from four ministries to steer the project through Lisbon 's bureaucratic maze . Inspired by the ideas of Prince Henry the Navigator , Portuguese 14th- and 15th-Century mariners undertook a series of voyages that expanded Europe 's perception of the world and opened contacts with the people of other continents . Dias became the first man to sail beyond the shores of North Africa down the West African coast to the Cape of Good Hope in 1488 , da Gama discovered the sea route to India in 1499 and Pedro Alvares Cabral first landed in Brazil in 1500 . Sailing under Spanish colors , Magellan began the first circumnavigation of the globe in 1519 .