Rapture seems an unlikely term with which to associate the majority of the venal , weak , self-centered characters in David Hare 's `` The Secret Rapture '' at South Coast Repertory . The word is not used in the scuba diving sense , as in rapture of the deep , although spiritual euphoria is part of the mystery Hare attempts to evoke . As he explains it , `` The 'secret rapture ' is that moment at which a nun expects to be united with Christ . In other words , it 's death . '' If that sends a shiver through you , it should . A kind of chill stalks `` The Secret Rapture '' from the moment light slices through blackout as a woman nervously opens a door and is startled to find her sister sitting in the dark room . Their father has died ; his body is on the bed . Lives will be changed , not by the event of death , which is only a trigger , but by the forces of interpersonal and public politics that will rush in to fill the void . Hare has not made a secret of his fascination with how larger societal forces shape our private ends . He tackled that notion in `` Plenty , '' a psychological dissection of post-World War II England seen through the collapse of one woman . In `` Rapture , '' he has taken the fallout of Thatcherism and created an unlikely morality play through the secular canonization of another . Of the sisters mentioned earlier , Marion ( Bairbre Dowling ) is a junior minister in a hidebound conservative government while Isobel ( Caroline Goodall ) is an artist . They have only one thing in common : their late father 's widow , Katherine ( Libby Boone ) , a much younger woman , alcoholic and incapable of coping responsibly . She becomes their unequally shared responsibility . Isobel loves , lives and works with Irwin ( Simon Templeman ) , another artist with whom she ekes out a contented living . She is interior , tender , idealistic . Marion is exterior , self-righteous and , by her own eventual admission , incapable of feeling ( `` I do n't have the right equipment '' ) . She is married to Tom ( Hal Landon Jr. ) , a born milquetoast and born-again Baptist who heads something called Christians in Business . The road to destruction is subtle , even if Hare 's play is n't always . First Marion allows Katherine to inflict herself on Isobel . Later Marion and Tom in a `` Christian '' desire to `` help , '' bedevil Isobel 's and Irwin 's life with self-serving temptations that alter chemistries and wreak ultimate chaos . The play , which achieves this with uneven success , ends with a tortured epiphany that wo n't bear repeating . `` Secret Rapture '' is not about plot or cause , but about effect . It 's about the malice of weakness and the powerlessness of strength . It 's about currents and resistance , humanity and honor . In short , it is dangerous , difficult stuff . After such plays as `` Speed-the-Plow , '' `` Serious Money , '' `` Glengarry Glen Ross , '' `` Palladium Is Moving '' and even `` Other People 's Money , '' `` The Secret Rapture '' is , as Hare himself recognizes , an attempt `` to buck the trend . Unfashionably , '' says he , `` I have a heroine . '' And then some . Under David Emmes ' spare and precise direction , the production at SCR is a part of Orange County 's ongoing Festival of Britain . The design team and the cast are a hands-across-the-sea mixer , with the excellent Goodall and Templeman hailing from England , along with set designer Robert Jones , whose supply of ever-changing , meticulously detailed locales would seem to defy the logistics of storage and wing space . Boone is a vibrant manic-depressive as Katherine , and Dowling 's Marion is shrill and obnoxious enough in her tailored suits to conjure up the inevitable associations . Elizabeth Dennehy provides some entertaining man-eating moments as her shallow assistant Rhonda , while Landon 's apologetic piety and limpness seem a loaded act of perpetual self-erasure . But the play pivots around the complex Isobel and , only because he is so inextricably the instrument of her fate , around Irwin . Templeman manages to embody weakness with plenty of presence , while Goodall 's generous and inviting Isobel thoroughly eludes self-pity . This is a play destined to arouse polemics , but it is curious to recall that it did so earlier this year for the wrong reasons , when Hare challenged New York Times critic Frank Rich to a duel of words after Rich reacted negatively to the New York production Hare had directed . Rich declined , but the furor persisted -- unfortunately so . The play deserves to be talked about not for its Rich review , but for the richness of its content .