Clifford J. Walker is a historian and an expert on a river many think is a myth -- the 150-mile Mojave River , one of the longest and largest underground rivers in the world . `` A lot of people do n't believe there is a Mojave River . They see the dry bed not realizing that beneath it flows a wide , wide river , '' said Walker , 60 , who teaches a course on the history of the Mojave Desert at Barstow Community College . He wrote the 352-page book `` Back Door to California : The Story of the Mojave River Trail , '' published in 1986 by the Mojave River Valley Museum Assn . It tells the story of the river and its importance from prehistoric time to the turn of the 20th Century . Walker is head of the association that owns and operates the Mojave River Valley Museum in Barstow . He has been teaching English and history at Barstow High School for 35 years . East of town , Walker looked across the dry river bed where it is a mile wide with 20-foot-high walls of sand on each bank . `` During the floods of 1938 this was full of cascading water , shoreline to shoreline . Downstream in Baker , people were rescued in rowboats . This happens during years of heavy rains in what most people think of as the bone-dry Mojave Desert . Sounds incredible , does n't it ? '' said Walker . The river 's headwaters are in the San Bernardino Mountains near Cajon Pass . It ends at the Mojave Sink or Soda Dry Lake at Baker . During the Ice Age , it continued on into Death Valley . `` Down through the centuries the river was a prime source of water for Indians . The river runs above ground in a few places . In past years , it surfaced in many more places than it does today . It flowed above ground for a short distance in Barstow until a few years ago , '' said Walker . Indian campsites are still evident along the river , where Indian paintings and carvings can be seen on nearby rock outcroppings . At Oro Grande , footprints of a group of adults and children walking across the muddy banks of the Mojave were frozen in time when covered with lava . Scientists have dated the footprints to be 5,120 years old , reported Walker in his book . Walker leads museum and classroom field trips to historic places along the river . Near Yermo , he shows the site where the skeleton of a headless horseman collapsed on the remains of a horse was found in 1965 . `` A battle between horse thieves and ranchers happened at that location in the 1840s . It 's believed the remains were of a young man killed in the skirmish . But why his head is missing is a mystery , '' said the historian . Not far from where the headless horseman was uncovered are ruts made by hundreds of wagons crossing the desert on the old Mojave River Trail along the dry riverbed . The trail was used by wagon trains from 1848 until the late 1800s . `` Jefferson Hunt was the first to use wagons on an old mule trail that spanned the desert . He led 100 wagons from Salt Lake City to Las Vegas , then across the Mojave Desert to Southern California , charging $ 10 a wagon for his services , '' said Walker . Remains of prehistoric animals have been found all along the shores of the Mojave River : saber-toothed cats , mammoths , wolves , sloths , four kinds of camels and two kinds of horses -- one the size of a fox terrier , said Walker . `` It does n't look like much on the surface , but the Mojave River is a very exciting river that played a key role in settling Southern California , '' he said . `` During Prohibition , several bootleggers had stills tapping the crystal clear underground waters of the Mojave River , distilling their illegal products in this out-of-the-way place for sale in the Los Angeles area . '' Walker 's next book will be the story of Prohibition in California .