Pop superstar Michael Jackson has dispatched his legal representative to New York to nail down the final details of a revised contract with CBS Records that is expected to be the most lucrative in music history . Jackson lawyer Bertram Fields went to New York this week to join the singer 's primary contract negotiator -- New York attorney Allen Grubman -- who is seeking to secure from CBS Records a special production arrangement for Jackson as well as royalties of more than $ 2.50 per album , sources say . Jackson is also asking CBS Records , which is owned by Sony Corp. , for his own recording label and other concessions , a source close to Jackson said . The entertainer is proposing that CBS Records advance him more than $ 18 million per album , a cost that the company would recoup from Jackson 's $ 2.50-plus per-album royalty . Pop music royalties typically range from $ 1 to $ 1.50 per album , including publishing royalties . It could not be learned whether the per-album royalty is based on the retail or wholesale album price or whether the proposed royalty includes publishing rights or other costs . Royalties negotiated under standard CBS Records contracts normally include publishing royalties and are based on an album 's wholesale price . Still , the stiff royalty being sought by Jackson would leave CBS Records with precious little profit , industry sources say . One entertainment lawyer estimates that under Jackson 's current agreement with CBS Records , an album would have to sell more than 6 million copies before CBS Records would make any money . `` Those are extraordinary numbers , '' said another entertainment lawyer . `` CBS does n't have a lot of room left over to pay for publishing royalties , shipping , manufacturing and overhead . . . . On the other hand , there are probably a lot of other labels out there who would love to sign Michael Jackson . '' CBS Records spokesman Bob Altshuler declined to comment about the status of contract negotiations with Jackson or speculate about the artist 's importance to the label : `` We never talk about any negotiations with anyone , '' Altshuler said . But CBS Records has been under pressure to reach an accord with the entertainer in the wake of the rancorous departure of its volatile former chief executive , Walter R. Yetnikoff , who often boasted of his close relationship with CBS Records ' artists . Yetnikoff 's relationship with Jackson deteriorated in June when he got into a dispute with rival record industry mogul David Geffen over Jackson . Yetnikoff and former Jackson attorney John Branca had opposed a Geffen effort to get Jackson to perform for the soundtrack of the movie `` Days of Thunder . '' Shortly after the dispute , Jackson fired Branca , hired new lawyers and advisers , and asked CBS Records to renegotiate his current record contract , which would have paid him an estimated $ 18 million for his next album . While no entertainer apparently has a record deal that rivals Jackson 's current pact with CBS Records , Jackson , who is known to be obsessed with setting music industry precedents , wants to make sure his deal far outdistances that of any other artist , including his sister Janet Jackson , who is currently renegotiating her contract with A & M Records .