Christmas is , above all , a children 's holiday . For them Dec. 25 , 1990 , in Southern California was a time of sophistication and innocence , of piety and materialism , of poverty and wealth , of family ties and loneliness , against a backdrop of varied ethnic groups and faiths : The beige stucco house in Monterey Park where Bea Hernandez lives is on a corner lot . But even with the extra swath of lawn , 17 grandchildren fill up the front yard . And for Christmas , of course , every one was there . They helped polish off the tamales , 24 dozen of them . Depending on the children 's ages , they frolicked on the grass or clung to mothers ' legs . Some flashed smiles punctuated with braces ; others revealed gaps where front teeth had fallen out . But no matter how old , they shared one abiding belief : Santa Claus had indeed come to town the night before . Alexia Bravo , 5 , reported having seen `` something red by the fireplace '' in the living room Christmas Eve . `` He left me a pretty ballerina , '' she said . Her brother Mike , 14 , received a fishing pole Christmas morning and was not a bit surprised . `` I wrote to Santa Claus that I have been good and that I wanted a fishing pole . I gave it to my mom , '' he said . `` She said she mailed it . '' She must have . For Peter Yung , Cindy Luu , Tom Huey -- all 16 -- and Fred Chow , 15 , Christmas brunch was fast-food fried chicken in Alhambra . For Zalmy Berkowitz , 7 , lunch on Christmas day meant a trip to the big city from Huntington Beach for kosher pizza in the heart of the Fairfax District . For Jessica Kaye , 8 , Christmas dinner was ham , scalloped potatoes , hot baked rolls and a choice of pies for dessert , prepared by her bachelor uncle in the flats of Woodland Hills . For Phillip and Tania Jabour , 6 and 9 : grape leaves and mahshi , which is squash and zucchini stuffed with rice , cooked by their Palestinian grandmother . For Eric Webb , 2 , the best Christmas fare was the colorful plastic French fries and hamburger that came with a 3-foot-tall reproduction of a McDonald 's restaurant , one of the morning 's gifts . On a South-Central Los Angeles stoop , Eric 's uncle , Robert Anderson , tried to assemble the counter while his mother , Sharon Anderson , warned that the treats were artificial . `` They 're not real , '' she said . Eric did n't care . He just kept gnawing away at the parts while his uncle stared dolefully at the instructions . The holiday celebration came Monday night at the Torres home in Santa Ana , so Tuesday it was back to work for 13-year-old Maribel . From 9 a.m. until dusk , she manned her station on a corner of Harbor Boulevard in Costa Mesa south of the San Diego Freeway , selling bunches of roses from a white bucket . Business was good as scores of people made a quick stop for flowers on the way to Christmas dinner . By late afternoon , the eighth-grader at Lathrop Junior High School had sold $ 300 worth of flowers , six times what she says she usually gets on her weekend and holiday shifts . The extra cash from commissions will pay for new clothes she 's had her eye on , Maribel said . As for Christmas ? `` It 's just another day , '' she said flatly . `` It 's a happy day because we 're going over to my cousin Bernice 's house , because you get presents and stuff , and because you get to see your relatives and people you have never seen before , '' said Richard Johnson , 10 , of South-Central Los Angeles . Jordan Chaidez is a practical 8-year-old . He was happy to get a Game Boy , a miniature video game . `` This is for when you 're bored when your mom 's at the mall , '' said Jordan , who lives in Ontario and was visiting his father in Monterey Park . `` You can take it out and play with it for a long time . '' He was thrilled by his new shoes . `` These are special skateboarding shoes , '' he explained . `` And I begged for them for two weeks . '' `` And you cried , too , '' said his dad , Jimmie . `` Yeah , '' said Jordan . `` I cried , too . '' For young girls at a group home near USC for abused and emotionally disturbed children , Christmas was a time of loss with subtle undertones of hope . A Sunday night blaze in the office of the Youth Growth and Development home had destroyed the youngsters ' presents . Moreover , most of the children , who live at the state-funded facility because of problems at home , would not be seeing their families on the holiday . `` It makes me sad , '' said Antonia Gonzalez , 14 , a tear in her left eye . `` I 'm hoping to see my mother and my two brothers again sometime in the future . '' Still , the six girls at the Dalton Avenue home were looking forward to a holiday dinner with other boys and girls who live in nearby group homes . They were also somewhat buoyed by last-minute replacement gifts that began arriving on Christmas Eve from Good Samaritans who had heard about the fire on TV news broadcasts . `` It might just turn out OK , '' said Casonna White , 15 . `` We 're going to get gifts , although it 's not going to be the same . '' `` Christmas is a time of giving and receiving , sharing and love . This fire was started by someone jealous because she was n't going to have a good Christmas , I think . '' At a leafy intersection in San Marino , 4-year-old Kaitlin Lester and her 3-year-old cousin , Cody Mitchell , were out for a morning stroll . Cody 's father , Randy , was carrying another child , his 2-year-old daughter Amanda . Kaitlin , in white long-sleeved turtleneck and green corduroy overalls , was happily discussing her presents -- `` two Bubba foowawas '' ( translation : `` two Barbie Ferraris '' ) -- when Cody started pushing her . `` Cody , do n't push me , '' Kaitlin said . `` I do n't want to get my clothes dirty . '' Cody laughed and gave her a good shove with both hands , sending her sprawling onto a nearby lawn . Kaitlin got herself up and punched Cody in the eye . `` I got Reeboks and a phone -- because of Jesus ' birthday , '' said Jason Harb , 14 , of El Segundo . Jon Christopher Robnett , 4 , happily tested his new Batman crossbow from the front porch of his grandparents ' house in View Park . He used the gleaming black-and-tan device to send little plastic discs spinning onto the lawn . He was visiting along with his parents , his sister El-Lenor , 7 , and brothers Julius , 3 , and Justin , 14 months . It was n't long , though , before Jon Christopher could be heard asking , `` Dad ? '' Will you find that Batman thing for me ? '' `` Where did you shoot it ? I do n't know what you did with it , '' said his father , Chris . His mother , Debra , sighed .