Here is a list of the 24 Case Study Houses that were built and the architects who built them . Many of the architects who designed Case Study Houses are dead , including some of the more famous , such as Richard Neutra , Charles and Ray Eames , Eero Saarinen , Quincy Jones and Raphael Soriano . A dozen are still living , and several are still in practice , including Pierre Koenig in Brentwood and Ed Killingsworth in Long Beach . Craig Ellwood lives in Tuscany , Italy , and teaches one semester a year at Cal Poly Pomona . Whitney Smith , John Rex and Kemper Nomland Jr. have retired . Ralph Rapson , Calvin Straub and Beverly Thorne have moved from Southern California . 1946 : 540 Barrington Ave. , Brentwood . J. R. Davidson . The first Case Study House , since destroyed , was small but ingeniously planned , without an inch of wasted space in its innovative open plan . 1947 : 857 Chapea Road , Pasadena . Spaulding & Rex . In the second Case Study House , the basic open floor plan , with the living areas separating the parents ' and children 's bedrooms , was developed as a prototype that became the standard for many following houses . -- 9945 Beverly Grove Drive , Beverly Hills . Rodney A. Walker . -- 7861 Woodrow Wilson Drive , Hollywood . Rodney A. Walker . -- 199 Chautauqua Blvd. , Pacific Palisades . Rodney A. Walker . ( These three houses , by Walker , pioneered a simplified wood-frame construction made up of standard 3-foot modules intended as a model for low-cost housing . ) -- 711 San Rafael Ave. , Pasadena . Nomland & Nomland . Set in a picturesque eucalyptus grove , this house features a simple shed roof and long walls of glass . -- 4755 Lasheart Drive , La Canada Flintridge . J. R. Davidson . This small and simple dwelling is another example of the Case Study House urge to create standard and repeatable plans for low-cost houses . 1948 : 6236 N. Deerfield Ave. , San Gabriel . Thornton M. Abell . A blank concrete block wall screens the house from its suburban street to create a private interior environment . -- 219 Chautauqua Blvd. , Pacific Palisades . Richard Neutra . This house continued the innovations Neutra had incorporated in a number of his pre-World War II two-bedroom houses , including the ground-hugging horizontal emphasis and the deep and sheltering roof overhangs . 1949 : 13187 Chalon Road , Brentwood . Wurster & Bernardi . An H-shaped plan divides the living from the sleeping wings with a central porch that is also the entry . -- 203 Chautauqua Blvd. , Pacific Palisades . Charles Eames . The most famous Case Study House , the Eames house uses off-the-shelf industrial structural components in a style that later became known as high-tech . -- 201 Chautauqua Blvd. , Pacific Palisades . Eames and Saaarinen . Surprisingly restrained in its structural expression , Entenza 's own house lacks the boldness of the Eames house next door . 1950 : 1080 Ravoli Drive , Pacific Palisades . Raphael Soriano . In the first study house built of steel , Soriano pioneered the standardized system he used on many later projects . 1952 : 1811 Bel Air Road , Bel-Air . Craig Ellwood . 1955 : 9554 Hidden Valley Road , Beverly Hills . Craig Ellwood . The house has since been altered . 1957 : 1129 Miradero Road , Beverly Hills . Craig Ellwood . ( The design of the three houses above by Ellwood followed in Soriano 's footsteps with steel-framed dwellings that allowed long spans free of columns and clear interior spaces with low partition walls or storage units . The Miradero Road house has been altered . ) 1958 : 2275 Santa Rosa Ave. , Altadena . Straub & Hensman . Adapting the standardized , factory-built systems developed for steel framing , this wood-framed home for famed designer Saul Bass is warmer in feeling than the colder steel houses . -- 9036 Wonderland Park Ave. , Hollywood . Pierre Koenig . 1959 : 1635 Woods Drive , Hollywood . Pierre Koenig . Koenig , like Ellwood and Soriano , was fascinated by the lightness and openness a steel frame allowed in house design , enhanced by the dramatic possibilities of perching a house on the edge of a precipice . 1960 : Three houses : 2329 , 2342 and 2343 Rue de Ann , La Jolla . Killingsworth , Brady & Smith . This triad of houses in the hills marked the Case Study program 's move toward planning communities as well as single-family houses . Closely grouped , the homes offer a unique insight into what an entire Case Study House neighborhood or tract might have looked like . The house at 2343 Rue de Ann has been altered . 1962 : 82 Rivo Alto Canal , Naples . Killingsworth , Brady & Smith . The most urbane of all the homes , this house on one of the Naples area canals shows how a modern residential design could fit into an urban as well as a suburban environment . 1963 : 177 San Marino Dr. , San Rafael . David Thorne .