If President George Bush makes good on his threat to veto the Civil Rights Act of 1990 , it will not only be an act of unfeeling misgovernment , but also another sign of his party 's failure to resolve the contradiction between what it says it intends toward minority Americans and what it actually does for them . When former Ku Klux Klan leader David Duke ran for the U.S. Senate as a Republican , Bush and other GOP leaders were sincerely horrified and rushed to repudiate him . They have been less quick to forswear their party 's historic antipathy toward civil rights legislation -- an antipathy that made it easier for Duke to call himself a Republican , however uneasy it made GOP regulars feel to hear him say so . President Bush and the other Republican leaders of his generation are the architects of a strategy designed to wean Southern white and Northern ethnic voters away from their traditional Democratic loyalties . The key element in that approach is the anxiety both groups share about the legal and economic gains women , African-Americans and other minorities have made as the result of the civil rights movement . The GOP 's strategy has been an electoral success , but it all too frequently has turned the the party of Lincoln and Emancipation into the party of white male privilege through obfuscation . It is , of course , the habit of American political discourse to excuse inequality through euphemism : states ' rights , separate but equal , reverse discrimination . The circumlocution Bush employs to justify his hostility to the Civil Rights Act of 1990 is `` quotas . '' The President insists the bill will force quotas despite the fact it explicitly says , `` Nothing in the amendments made by this act shall be construed to require or encourage an employer to adopt hiring or promotional quotas on the basis of race , color , religion , sex or national origin . '' But Bush recently wrote : `` I am convinced that it will have the effect of forcing businesses to adopt quotas . . . It will also foster divisiveness and litigation . . . and do more to promote legal fees than civil rights . '' These observations are hard to reconcile with the bill 's explicit disclaimer and its actual provisions . The Civil Rights Act of 1990 aims to reverse six recent U.S. Supreme Court decisions that have weakened existing federal laws against employment discrimination . Among other things , it requires that employers once again bear the burden of legally justifying practices or policies whose objective effect is to create discriminatory patterns in hiring or promotion . It also allows victims of sexual , religious or ethnic discrimination to seek the same compensatory and punitive damages already available to those who have suffered racial discrimination . Fair-minded people will search such proposals in vain for the dire consequences over which Bush frets . The President already has said he will allow a bill restricting advertising on children 's television to become law without his signature , even though he personally feels it abridges some First Amendment freedoms . Americans are entitled to wonder why he can not do the same for the Civil Rights Act of 1990 .