It 's known simply as The Play , Cal 's five-lateral kickoff return for a touchdown through the Stanford band , which gave the Golden Bears a 25-20 victory over Stanford in 1982 . While Stanford 's dramatic 27-25 win in Saturday 's 93rd Big Game , which came on John Hopkins ' 39-yard field goal as time expired , was n't as bizarre , it was almost as absurd . `` I remember The Play and I guess you could call this The Play II , '' said Stanford running back Glyn Milburn , who rushed for 196 yards and one touchdown . Trailing 25-18 , Stanford drove 87 yards to a touchdown , with quarterback Jason Palumbis hitting split end Ed McCaffrey with a 19-yard touchdown pass with 12 seconds remaining to cut the score to 25-24 . Then it got strange . The Cardinal went for a two-point conversion to win the game , but defensive back John Hardy intercepted Palumbis ' pass in the end zone and Cal 's fans , thinking the game was over , engulfed the Memorial Stadium field . Hardy ran through the crowd , exchanging high-fives with rooters on his way to the tunnel that leads to the locker room . But 12 seconds remained . After the crowd was cleared , Cal was assessed a 15-yard penalty for delay of game by referee Pat Flood , who had earlier threatened to award Stanford the two-point conversion unless the field was cleared of fans who had left the stands in anticipation of a victory celebration . `` The rule states that if the team , which includes substitutes , band members and cheerleaders , come on the field , a penalty can be assessed , '' Flood said . `` We ca n't penalize the crowd . Cal had quite a few players on the field and the coaches were trying to hold them back . Some of them were all the way over near the Stanford sideline . They thought the game was over for some reason . '' While it can be argued that The Play would n't have been possible without the Stanford band , which had spilled onto the field during the chaotic five-lateral kickoff return , Cal Coach Bruce Snyder refused to blame Cal 's overzealous fans for contributing to the loss . `` I had no idea what the crowd was going to do , '' Snyder said . `` But I just want to go on record as saying that over the course of this year , fan support , particularly in the student section , has been outstanding . In a way , they get credit for the improvement of Cal 's football team and I appreciate the hell out of them . '' Kicking off from the 50 , instead of the 35 , Hopkins dribbled a kick along the right sideline . Although several Cal players had a chance to recover , Stanford defensive back Kevin Scott covered it at the Cal 37 with nine seconds left . Scott admitted later that he was out of bounds when he recovered the kick . `` My feet were out of bounds , but my knees were in bounds , '' Scott said . `` But it 's too late to give it back . There 's no instant replay in college football . '' Palumbis , who passed for 253 yards and one touchdown , threw an incomplete pass on first down , but Cal was penalized for roughing the passer when nose guard John Belli hit Palumbis after he had released the ball , giving Stanford a first down at the Cal 22 with five seconds left . `` It 's tough to tell right now until I look at the films , '' Belli said of the call . `` I 'm an aggressive player and it was an obvious passing down . I was just trying to get some heat on the quarterback . I did n't realize it was late when I hit him . I was going full steam . I did n't really hit him , I sort of ran through him . '' Snyder thought it was a bad call . `` It was n't a good call , '' Snyder said . `` Whether legitimate or not , the officials determine that . The referee 's job is to protect the quarterback and he made his judgment . '' Palumbis disagreed , saying , `` The call came immediately , so I think it was a good call . '' The 15-yard penalty moved Stanford into field-goal range for Hopkins , who had made kicks of 26 , 29 , 47 and 22 yards earlier in the game . So instead of a 53-yard field goal , Hopkins trotted onto the field and hit a 39-yarder to beat the Golden Bears . `` I knew it was good right away , but it was a tough kick because it was into the wind , '' Hopkins said . Stanford Coach Dennis Green made sure that the Stanford band would n't determine the outcome of this game , sending extra security guards to police the band and ensure that the musicians would n't leave the stands until the game was over . `` I had my No . 1 security guy make sure the band was n't on the field , and I had my No . 2 security guy make sure no players were on the field because I was n't sure if there was any time left on the clock , '' Green said . Until it turned into a theater of the absurd , Cal tailbacks Russell White and Anthony Wallace dominated the game . White , who rushed for 177 yards and two touchdowns , finished the regular season with 1,000 yards . Wallace , who gained 99 yards , ended the regular season with 1,002 . White gave Cal a 25-18 lead when he scored his second touchdown on an eight-yard run with 6:03 left to cap an 88-yard drive . After Cal forced Stanford to punt on the ensuing series , it appeared that the Golden Bears ( 6-4-1 4-3-1 ) would run out the final 4:16 . But Cal was unable to kill the clock , punting to Stanford ( 5-6 , 4-4 ) with two minutes left . After taking over at his 13 , Palumbis made a brilliant play to keep the drive alive on fourth and six at the Stanford 35 , hitting wide receiver Chris Walsh with a 17-yard pass over the middle with 56 seconds left . Six plays later , Palumbis connected with McCaffrey for the touchdown .