'' I 've been the No . 1 DJ in Paris and the No . 1 DJ in London , '' says Mike Pasternak , alias Emperor Rosko . `` I 'd like to become the No . 1 DJ in L.A. , but that 's no easy thing to do . '' Pasternak sits in the broadcasting studio in his Thousand Oaks home . Around him is all the right equipment -- turntables , CD player , sound effects gadgets . Stacked against the wall are newly released records , sent gratis from labels in the U.S. and Europe . He even has fan mail . Dear Rosko , About two weeks ago I sended you a letter -- do n't you receive it ? I think you get it shortly . Rosko , you are so manly . I 've got your pictures and your voice on my tape-recording -- my friends are very jealous . But Pasternak wo n't be meeting Monika , the letter-writer , at a personal appearance . He wo n't be taking dedications from her or any other listeners . Emperor Rosko does reign , but only in Europe . Monika lives in Poland and hears him over Radio Luxembourg . Other fans listen on the BBC 's Radio 1 or on Swiss Romande . Pasternak produces the programs -- some of them weekly , some of them specials -- in Thousand Oaks and mails the tapes overseas . Many of his contacts were made during stints as a DJ in England and France -- successful stints that have failed to translate into a major radio career in Los Angeles . Pasternak , 46 , spent nearly two years in 1966-67 as a disc jockey on the original pirate station , Radio Caroline , a ship that broadcast off the coast of England . The station had no government licenses and paid no taxes and spawned a number of imitators . From 1969 to 1975 , he hosted `` World Service Countdown , '' a BBC program styled after `` American Top 40 . '' The British edition of Billboard magazine named him top European DJ of 1976 . `` I could tell a thousand stories about the pirate radio days , '' he said . `` It was both very exciting and very boring , because we 'd do two weeks on the ship and one week off . Sometimes there was absolutely nothing to do . So we 'd say on the air , 'If you support Radio Caroline , drive to the cliffs tonight and turn on your headlamps . ' They 'd do it , and it was a tremendous thing to see . '' Pasternak was introduced to Europe at an early age . The son of movie producer Joe Pasternak ( `` Where the Boys Are , '' `` The Great Caruso '' ) , he was born and educated in Los Angeles but also attended boarding schools in Switzerland and Paris . He said his years overseas have helped him understand his audience 's tastes . At various times Emperor Rosko has recrowned himself Kaiser Rosko or Le President Rosko . He gives listeners a mix of U.S. and European music , celebrity interviews and entertainment news delivered in a zany , manic style . A typical set might include some Beatles tunes , more recent oldies by such people as Bronski Beat and new music ; an interview with Cyndi Lauper , and a contest in which listeners identify songs from snippets . `` I read everything from The Times to the National Enquirer to get my material , although 80 % of it is from the Enquirer end of the scale , '' Pasternak said . `` I sell the image of Palm Springs and Malibu . As far as they 're concerned , I 'm at the beach . '' To foster that impression , Emperor Rosko mixes the sound of sea gulls and surf into some of his broadcasts . Rather than a Thousand Oaks address , he uses a post office box on Sunset Boulevard in Hollywood . And he does not let facts hinder the creativity of his reporting . Two days before a jury convicted Zsa Zsa Gabor of slapping a Beverly Hills policeman , Emperor Rosko reported the guilty verdict on a tape mailed to Europe . `` I just knew she could n't get away with it , so I went with my instincts , '' Pasternak said . Radio Luxembourg , with its high-powered transmitter , broadcasts Emperor Rosko to 27 countries . Pasternak has gotten mail from as far away as Russia and Czechoslovakia . `` It does sound you are really enjoying yourself , '' writes Phil Davson from Switzerland in a recent letter . `` Yes , it 's definitely a happening show on Luxy -- probably the only happening show . '' Pasternak does the `` Luxy '' show in English . Programs for France are done in French . He makes liberal use of horns and whistles and often closes with : `` Emperor Roscoe has enjoyed himself , my subjects . My padded cell awaits me now . '' Pasternak has been exporting programs to Europe for 10 years , ever since he moved back to California . He said he left Europe to attempt a U.S. radio career and also to be near his father , who has been ill. Pasternak said the shows take two days a week to produce , and he fleshes out his living as a mobile disc jockey . He provides music at weddings and other parties and performs at personal appearances by Casey Kasem . `` Casey does the first 15 minutes , gets all the attention , and I do the rest , '' he said . `` He 's one of the best DJs around , '' Kasem said . `` I 've used him many times at dances . He puts together sets so that he gets young and old on their feet and keeps them there . He mixes both oldies and new songs . '' Pasternak fell under radio 's spell while growing up in the 1950s and '60s . He borrowed his on-air moniker from a black Los Angeles disc jockey , Bill Mercer , who called himself Rosko . He also admired Johnny Hayes , Wolfman Jack and , in San Francisco , Bob Mitchell and Tom Donaghue . The Wolfman influence is evident , as Emperor Rosko 's voice often takes on a raspy sound . `` I did a show with Wolf on the BBC , '' Pasternak recalled . `` I take him off pretty good , so we had a contest to see if anyone could tell us apart . They could n't . '' Pasternak is divorced and has no children . He said radio occupies the central place in his life . `` It was always my love , '' he said . `` I could have been an actor . My dad was a producer . But I loved the music . I loved rapping along with the rhythm of the songs . '' He also enjoyed the interplay with audiences , taking calls and dedications . `` To be able to have that kind of fun with people is the ultimate trip , '' he said . But with an ocean and a continent separating Emperor Rosko and his subjects , the immediacy is lost . `` L.A. is the toughest town in the world for a DJ , '' he said . `` Everybody comes here . Maybe to make it you have to be able to sell yourself better than I can . Sometimes I wish I could stick a transmitter on the roof of my house and just broadcast from here . ''