We were a bit late , would n't you know it , for an interview with the man who pays more attention to the time than anyone in this country . So when we entered the tiny paper-strewn office of our nation 's timekeeper , we asked just what time it was . `` This , of course , is exactly right , '' he said in a heavy Austrian accent , pointing confidently to an unadorned black and white clock on the wall , the only one in the room . `` You can check it . '' With that , Dr. Gernot M.R . Winkler , director of the U.S. Time Service Department , picked up the receiver of his desk phone and dialed direct to his personal ally in the quest to form a more perfect world through the synchronization of time -- the master clock of the United States . `` U.S . Naval Observatory Master Clock . At the tone , Eastern Daylight Time , 14 hours , 49 minutes , 38 seconds , beep . Universal Time , 18 hours 49 minutes 43 seconds , beep . '' The message coming through the receiver was clear and ungarbled . It 's exactly what Winkler expects from the master clock , a technological marvel that looks like a huge rack of audio equipment with a digital time readout and sits quietly in an environmentally controlled room about 10 paces from his office . It 's the keeping of precise time by this clock that is responsible for maintaining order around the country . Without it , television broadcasts would interfere with each other , satellites would go haywire and planes and trains would never know when to arrive . My watch , a relatively inexpensive timepiece with a degree of accuracy that does n't even merit mention in comparison with the master clock , said it was about 2:53 p.m . It was just a little fast , we learned , after receiving a couple of quick lessons in the more simple intricacies of the telling of time from the master himself -- the Time Lord , as Winkler 's son has dubbed him . * Lesson One : The master clock tells time on a 24-hour system , widely used by the military and radio communications and scientific community . That means the day goes from 00:00 to 23:59 . * Lesson Two : The world is broken into 24 time zones , so everybody has sunlight at noon and darkness at midnight . Of the 24 time zones , the United States is located in eight . Universal time is the time at the Greenwich meridian , the prime meridian from which all time zones radiate . The meridian passes through London . Those are the easy lessons , we were soon to discover . We traveled to the U.S . Naval Observatory , located on 75 acres in the northwest corner of the District of Columbia , which oversees the enormous task of keeping precise time . Vice President Dan Quayle lives in an aging mansion on these grounds , and his tennis court is within view of the tiny time service building housing Winkler , his small staff and his master clock . Winkler , 67 , is a physicist and an astronomer who has been managing the time service department for nearly a quarter of a century . Time is a passion for this serious man , who speaks of his `` aesthetic attraction '' to things precise . Taking off his glasses and fidgeting with them , Winkler sat back in his thickly padded desk chair and looked over a desk full of paper . Then he matter-of-factly explained that the first thing we needed to understand about time is that there is no such thing . `` The simplest thing to explain what time is is to explain that it is just an idea which we developed from change , and the abstract measure of that change is time , '' said Winkler with authority . `` It 's really a human invention . '' The nature of time also makes it a subject ideal for humor . The temptation to make a joke with every detail is so great , we discerned the answers to our most burning questions about time early in the interview . No , Winkler is very rarely late ( he thinks it 's `` tactless and impolite '' ) , he does n't work around the clock , nor does he watch the clock all day to pass the time . He does have a theory of how to get more time in the day : '' By not doing nonsense , useless things . Reading 99 % of what is printed today . Listening to 99 % of what people tell you . `` In other words , by restricting yourself to the really valuable things , you have a big amount of time . You can be very well read by reading very little . Just do n't fill your mind with garbage . That 's the only way with which you can gain time . And a very effective one . '' Winkler said people take time for granted and do n't really understand what the impact would be if time were not coordinated precisely . `` The use of time is much more widespread than people realize . You may not know , for instance , that every television station operates on an atomic clock , '' which can be accurate to one second in every 300,000 years . `` All the television stations , all the power stations , all the public services are very closely synchronized . If you drive an airplane , the systems that support that are very tightly synchronized . What we do is clear up the problems in all these stations in which we are in constant connection . '' Part of Winkler 's job is to make adjustments to the clocks about once a year to synchronize the time determined by the rotation of the Earth with the time kept by the atomic clock . The Earth 's rotation is not constant and slows over a period of time , so one second must be added to the master clock annually to synchronize the two . Called a leap second , it is based on the same principal as the leap day , which occurs once every four years . The leap day is necessary to synchronize the calendar year with the solar year , which also is slightly variable because of the inconsistency of the Earth 's rotation . Winkler and his staff also provide astronomical data obtained from a variety of very sophisticated telescopes that measure the positions and movement of cosmic objects for use in navigation , space travel and scientific research .