As the Christmas season -- the greeting card industry 's biggest moneymaker -- approaches its climax , major retail card makers are busily planning for Valentine 's Day , 1991 , and Christmas , 1992 . `` We normally work about 18 months to two years in advance of the holiday lines , '' said Barbara Miller , products spokeswoman for Hallmark Cards in Kansas City , Mo . She said planners are researching and planning 1991 Valentine 's Day cards , which are second to Christmas cards in total sales and volume . Each year , 900 million sweetheart cards and 2.2 billion Christmas cards are exchanged in the United States , said Nancy Riviere , director of communications for the Greeting Card Assn . in Washington . She added that the card industry makes $ 4 billion in U.S. sales annually . American Greetings Corp. , based in Cleveland , has already begun creative development for Christmas , 1992 , said John A. Hernandis , director of corporate communications . `` The activity does n't parallel the event , '' Hernandis said . `` Our work for this Christmas season ended many , many months ago . '' It takes months for the card makers to design , produce , write and finally distribute the cards . After assignments are given to artists , writers and editors , their proposals are checked by a review committee . Finally , after being printed , boxed and packaged , the cards are shipped to warehouses and retailers . Hallmark , the nation 's largest card maker with about 44 % of the market , will design about 2,000 different Valentine 's Day cards for 1991 , Miller said . Doug Westen , manager of the Card Factory at the Beverly Center in Beverly Hills , said his store will not have to put away any unsold Christmas items to make room for the next major holiday , because this year 's Christmas sales have been `` wonderful . We have nothing left . '' Westen plans to display Valentine 's Day cards beginning in mid-January . Easter and Mother 's Day are the third- and fourth-largest card-selling holidays , with U.S. sales of 185 million and 145 million cards , respectively , Miller said . Holiday cards usually remain available for sale for four to six weeks .