The previously secret diary of writer and social critic H. L. Mencken discloses virulent anti-Semitism , racism and pro-Nazi leanings , shocking even the sympathetic Mencken scholar who edited it . On Mencken 's instructions , the diary , typewritten on 2,100 pages from 1930 to 1948 , remained sealed for 25 years after his death in 1956 . The Baltimore Evening Sun , where Mencken once worked , published excerpts Monday . The diary has been available to scholars since 1981 , but quoting either directly or indirectly from the 2,100-page document was prohibited . On the subject of Jews , Mencken wrote in December , 1943 , that the Maryland Club had decided against admitting any more Jewish members after the only one on its rolls died . `` There is no other Jew in Baltimore who seems suitable , '' he said . Of blacks , he wrote in September , 1943 , that `` . . . it is impossible to talk anything resembling discretion or judgment to a colored woman . They are all essentially child-like , and even hard experience does not teach them anything . '' On Oct. 24 , 1945 , he wrote that `` the course of the United States in World War II . . . was dishonest , dishonorable and ignominious , and the Sunpapers , in supporting ( President Franklin D. ) Roosevelt 's foreign policy , shared in this disgrace . '' The book , `` The Diary of H. L. Mencken , '' was edited by Mencken scholar Charles A. Fecher of Baltimore and published by Alfred A. Knopf . It was scheduled for January release but is already available in many bookstores . The delay in publishing the diary stemmed from legal questions over whether Mencken intended it to be published , as well as concern over the extremely unflattering statements in it . Mencken is revered by many writers and journalists for his erudite writing and often brilliant social and political criticism . The National Press Club in Washington has a library named in his honor and the Baltimore Sun bestows an annual writing award named for him . He spent 40 years at the Evening Sun , edited the Smart Set and the American Mercury magazines and wrote dozens of books . `` His feelings about World War II are incredible in a man of his intelligence , knowledge and perception , '' Fecher wrote in his introduction to the book . `` He seems to have had no conception at all of what a German-Japanese victory would have meant to the civilized world , or to the liberties that he himself so cherished . '' Mencken 's attitude toward blacks `` was a curious mingling of total egalitarianism . . . and patronizing superiority , '' Fecher wrote . Mencken regularly published black writers in American Mercury and persuaded his publisher , Alfred A. Knopf , to publish their books . The last article he wrote for the Evening Sun in 1948 attacked segregation laws in Baltimore . But the diary discloses Mencken 's `` deeply ingrained conviction that black people were by their very nature inferior to white , '' Fecher wrote .