October is the beginning of our longest growing season and the most important time to plant for flower color now and through the spring . This time is known as the `` cool season . '' Get ready to plant `` cool season '' annuals , `` showy perennials '' and spring blooming bulbs . Watch for these annuals as they become available at your local nursery : calendula ; candytuft ; chrysanthemum ( the small bedding type ) ; dianthus ; English daisy ; Iceland poppies ; larkspur ; nemesia ; ornamental cabbage , kale ; pansies ; primrose , English ; schizanthus ; snapdragons stock , and sweet pea . For shade planting , watch for primrose obconica and primrose malicoides . Many varieties of `` showy perennials '' will be available in 4-inch pots . Plant these perennials ( and biennials ) for a jump start on permanent color in your garden : Canterbury bells ; coreopsis ; cyclamen ( for shade ) ; delphinium ; dusty miller ; foxglove ; hollyhock ; nicotiana ; rehmannia ; salvias and Shasta daisy . For the best selection , buy bulbs now and store them in paper bags in a cool , dry location until planting time . For added insurance when growing bulbs , hold off on planting until November , when the soil and air temperature cools off . Tulips and hyacinths need to be placed in a refrigerator after Oct. 15 and chilled for six weeks . Plant these bulbs immediately after taking them out of cold storage . Source : Cristin Fusano , Color Specialist/Horticulturist , Sherman Library and Gardens . . . AND GENERAL OCTOBER CARE TIPS De-thatch or aerate your lawn to prevent disease and pests during the winter . Prepare rhododendrons and azaleas for winter by mulching heavily around their base with 2 to 3 inches of mulch . When planting bulbs , be generous with the bone meal . Place some at the bottom of the planting hole , add a little dirt and then the bulb so the bulb does n't touch the bone meal . If you 're thinking of planting ground cover , plant it soon . If you do it now , the root system will become established before spring arrives and growth accelerates . Thin camellia buds now for bigger and better blooms later . For beautiful red and orange color in the fall , plant a pomegranate tree or shrub . To give your yard a fresh , new look , uproot plants that have overgrown their space . Tend to your roses by removing dead wood , twiggy growth and leaves with spots or mildew . But do n't prune them now . Before you plant perennials or annuals , prepare the planting bed well : Dig down 18 inches and work in organic matter . For a `` berry '' good holiday season , plant berried shrubs for garden color and holiday decorations . Keep fallen leaves raked off the lawn and out of flower beds . Certain pests love to set up house under them . A good choice for cool-season color is the bird of paradise . Stop feeding garden roses now because they are heading into their dormant period . For more annual color during winter , check out fairy primroses , stock and snapdragons . Source : California Assn . of Nurserymen .