With up to $ 2.2 million possibly available for the arts and tourism in Costa Mesa next year , the city 's Cultural Arts Committee has been asked for advice on how to spend it . The money is to be allocated through the new Costa Mesa Tourism , Arts and Promotion Council , which held its first formal meeting Thursday night . The nonprofit council is run by a seven-member board named by the Costa Mesa City Council . `` We are going to ask the Cultural Arts Committee to remain as an adviser on the state of the arts in the city of Costa Mesa , '' Mike Chitjian , newly elected tourism council president , said Thursday . Until recently , he was president of the cultural arts panel . The eight-member Cultural Arts Committee recommends grant recipients to the City Council . This year , 13 groups , from South Coast Repertory to the American Boys Choir , won a total of $ 175,000 in city subsidies . None of its members are employed by arts organizations , Chitjian said , but each one serves as a liaison to a grant recipient and could therefore convey those groups ' views or needs , he said . The new tourism and arts council , established in August , set its next meeting for Thursday and asked representatives from the cultural committee and from the Costa Mesa Chamber of Commerce 's hospitality committee to attend . In addition , any member of the local arts community may express his ideas by `` communicating with the Cultural Arts Committee by telephone or letters '' sent to City Hall , Chitjian said . Also , `` if the board feels they need direct input from cultural arts organizations themselves , I 'd be in favor of inviting ( officials from such groups ) to a meeting '' of the arts and tourism council , Chitjian added . At least one local arts administrator hopes the new council will seek ideas directly from arts professionals . `` I would hope this body , when it comes up with basic ideas , would at least get the reactions and feedback from the artistic community , '' said David Emmes , producing artistic director of South Coast Repertory . `` Not that we distrust them to come up with a plan . It just seems we are an asset that would be helpful about thinking about the plan or polishing the plan . '' Even as discussions begin on how to spend as much as $ 2.2 million on arts and tourism , the money source is still being decided . City officials are still deliberating over a funding mechanism , though they say the new tourism and arts council will probably be financed through a fee or tax charged on local hotel and motel bills . A city hotel-motel tax now generates about $ 2.2 million a year , officials said . A final recommendation on the proposed tax and how to spend the money will probably be made to the Costa Mesa City Council in January , said City Manager Allan L. Roeder . In addition to Chitjian , other members of the new council 's board were elected as its officers Thursday . Russell C. Cox , general manager of the Red Lion Hotel , Costa Mesa , was named vice president ; Edna G. Bradley , who belongs to a support group of the Orange County Performing Arts Center , was named secretary , and Frank Cole , a businessman , was elected treasurer .