Joyful , somber , contentious : The Simon Wiesenthal Center 's National Tribute Dinner at the Century Plaza was a bit of all three . Yitzhak Shamir , prime minister of Israel , gave the keynote speech after the evening 's host , `` Entertainment Tonight '' personality Mary Hart , presented 14 distinguished service awards for Holocaust remembrance in the performing arts to actors , writers , producers and directors who had worked on films and teleplays . Before the banquet , Secret Service and police personnel dotted the reception area outside the ballroom , sending guests through metal detectors and checking through purses , briefcases and camera equipment . Outside , cars bearing black-tie guests rolled past a line of candle-bearing protesters decrying Shamir 's visit with chants of `` Palestine , yes ; occupation , no . '' Later , actor James Woods , accepting an award for his work in the 1978 miniseries `` Holocaust , '' referred to the protesters as `` Nazis . '' The remark drew loud cheers from the capacity crowd of more than 1,000 . Wiesenthal , whom Mary Hart called `` the attorney general for 6 million of his brothers and sisters , '' came from Vienna for the occasion . He sat on an extended dais with Shamir , the honorees and others , including Wiesenthal Center officials Rabbi Marvin Hier , dean of the center , and Samuel Belzberg , chairman of the board of trustees . Also on the dais : Los Angeles Councilman Zev Yaroslavsky , Arnold Schwarzenegger , actress Leslie Ann Warren , and one of the dinner chairmen , MCA president Sidney Sheinberg . Samuel Belzberg spoke of the center 's accomplishments since its founding in 1977 , including its condemnation of events as diverse as the Carmelite nuns ' establishment at Auschwitz , anti-Semitic lyrics in rock music and the election of former Ku Klux Klan leader David Duke to the Louisiana state legislature . The other dinner chairman , publishing baron Robert Maxwell , was in England due to ill health , but his daughter Christine delivered a passionate speech -- written by her father -- which was one of the evening 's best received . ( Robert Maxwell 's parents and four siblings died in the gas chamber at Auschwitz . ) Dinner co-chairman William Belzberg presented the evening 's awards with Mary Hart . The honorees included Mary Steenburgen ( `` The Attic : The Hiding of Anne Frank '' ) ; Martin Starger ( `` Escape From Sobibor '' and `` Sophie 's Choice '' ) ; Arthur Cohn ( `` The Garden of the Finzi Continis '' ) ; Joseph Bottoms , Tovah Feldshuh , and Woods ( `` Holocaust '' ) ; Stanley Kramer ( `` Judgment at Nuremberg '' ) ; Dan Curtis and Jane Seymour ( `` War and Remembrance '' ) , and Robert Cooper , Craig T. Nelson and Ben Kingsley ( `` Murderers Among Us : The Simon Wiesenthal Story '' ) . Each honoree was escorted to the stage by people who had personal experience with the Holocaust -- internees , liberators and sympathizers . The crowd seemed especially moved by Ann Gilbert , who had been taken into the gas chamber but somehow managed to survive . Through the evening , speakers referred to the Wiesenthal Center 's new $ 34-million facility , Beit Hashoah -- the Museum of Tolerance , here in Los Angeles . Scheduled to open by this time next year , the museum will include exhibits , educational facilities , a theater and archives to educate visitors about the Holocaust . The evening concluded with dinner Co-Chairman Alan I. Casden 's introduction of Shamir . In prepared remarks , the prime minister saluted the movie industry for its role in keeping the memory of the Holocaust alive , and said : `` As you know , our state does not happen to be located in the most friendly neighborhood . When Moses led us there he probably did not foresee the fanaticism , hatred and war that are endemic to the region . Perhaps I should have a word with Charlton Heston about that . ''