It 's clear now that two formidable competitors loom for `` The Simpsons '' on Thursday nights . One is `` The Cosby Show '' on NBC . The other is `` The Simpsons '' itself . Fans of the Fox series may find it impossible to watch its long-awaited first-run return at 8 tonight ( Channels 11 and 6 ) without comparing it -- unfavorably -- with the weird and brilliant best episodes of last season . `` The Simpsons '' has been such an eclectic , inventive and shrewdly written show since its Jan. 14 premiere as a half-hour animated comedy that even second and third viewings of the same episodes still produce surprises . No wonder it was such a smash hit on Sunday nights , giving Fox giddy hope that `` The Simpsons '' could challenge even that glittering monarch of prime time , his royal Cosbyship himself . Thus , Fox packed off his royal Dudeship Bart and his family to Thursday night . What an epic war this would be . So complex is `` The Simpsons '' to produce , however , that the show 's fall debut has come late , preceded by its reruns getting destroyed in the ratings opposite first-run episodes of `` The Cosby Show . '' But now comes pay-back time , right ? You anticipated America 's favorite buck-toothed family delivering so spectacularly tonight that they would light up the sky , to say nothing of the Nielsens . Instead you feel a warm glow , a half hour that 's , well , very nice . It 's frequently good , but never great a la `` The Simpsons '' of old -- a sweet and tender story following the attempts by underachieving ( but no longer as proud of it ) Bart to avoid failing the fourth grade . The episode has its moments . Horrified by the prospect of repeating a grade , Bart gets customary fatherly support from Homer : `` At least you 'll be bigger than the other kids . '' Moreover , there 's some funny business with the nerdy class smarty-pants , Poindexter . And as always , `` The Simpsons '' is an unusual-for-TV , kid's-eye-view of the world , managing to tap genuine emotions and experiences , from violent video games to the euphoria of learning that school 's been canceled by the season 's first heavy snow . Yes , this is that rare series about kids that is written by people you can envision actually having been kids . Nevertheless , tonight 's over-sugary episode is not `` The Simpsons '' in top form . Coming closer is an episode arriving in two weeks ( the only other one supplied in advance by Fox ) -- a much darker , stranger , meaner and funnier story that finds Homer 's boss , the evil Charles Montgomery Burns , running for governor to counteract bad publicity about his pollution-spewing nuclear plant . The half hour starts with the discovery of a mutant three-eyed fish in a stream by the plant and then proceeds to lampoon just about everything in sight , from political campaigns to the media to criminal polluters like Burns . `` He 's one of the most despicable men who ever lived , '' Marge says . Obviously . Why else would Homer support him ? Mutant three-eyed fish . That 's `` The Simpsons . ''