FBI Director William S. Sessions expressed new confidence Tuesday that federal investigators will solve the March 10 bombing in La Jolla of the van being driven by the wife of Navy Capt . Will Rogers III . In June , Sessions had said there was less of a chance of the Federal Bureau of Investigation solving the Rogers ' van bombing than the bombing of Pan American Flight 103 from London to New York . He indicated to reporters in Washington on Tuesday that he now has changed his mind . `` In connection with 103 , I am confident we will in fact present the evidence that will allow us to have the strongest possible case that could -- if a grand jury chose to indict -- be presented in court , '' Sessions said at a news conference . `` As to the comparison between two different investigations ( 103 and the Rogers van bombing , ) , '' he said , `` they both have their frustrations . '' But , he added , `` I am confident that we will end up solving them both . '' Sharon Rogers , the wife of the former commander of the guided-missile cruiser Vincennes , narrowly escaped death when her van suddenly exploded at a busy La Jolla intersection in March . The FBI assumed jurisdiction in the case on the theory that the Rogers family was the target of a terrorist attack in retribution for Will Rogers ' mistaken order in 1988 aboard the Vincennes to shoot down a civilian Iranian airbus over the Persian Gulf . Sessions did not elaborate on why he has renewed confidence that the case will be solved . But he indicated that the FBI , which has recently investigated an American citizen with an alleged personal grudge against Will Rogers , has never completely ruled out terrorism as a motive . `` We are continuing that investigation , '' he said of the Rogers bombing . `` It is a matter of trying to be sure that it is a terrorist incident and was a terrorist incident and that we follow through to be able to gain the evidence that will allow us to present it to the United States attorney for presentation to a grand jury . '' His comments came as FBI agents continue to pursue leads involving George Marxmiller , a former commercial pilot living in Georgia who surfaced last month as a potential suspect in the van bombing . FBI officials have never commented publicly whether Marxmiller remains a suspect , but sources familiar with the matter said prospects of a breakthrough involving Marxmiller 's arrest appear dimmer than they did a few weeks ago . Will Rogers said Tuesday that he welcomes Sessions ' renewed confidence in solving the attempted murder of his wife . `` Sharon and I applaud the diligence and tenacity of the investigative authorities , and we share their confidence in the ultimate closure of this case , '' Rogers said . In June , Sessions said , `` I ca n't express with strong confidence '' that federal investigators will be able to solve the Rogers van bombing . He also said at that time that he was more confident about investigators identifying those responsible for the Flight 103 case , which also today remains unsolved . On Tuesday , the FBI director also said he supports a bill being sponsored by a San Diego congressman to create a reward fund for victims of international terrorism who are attacked on U.S. soil . Under the measure being pushed by Rep. Bill Lowery , R-San Diego , the first reward of $ 100,000 would be established in the Rogers bombing . Sessions said he believes that the reward could assist the FBI in the Rogers probe . `` There is , of course , a direct concern about being able to solve the case , '' he said . `` And rewards often incite people to come and give information where they might not have given it before . '' Karl Higgins , a San Diego aide to Lowery , said the reward measure was attached to a major appropriations bill that has been bogged down in Senate and House differences over other parts of the bill not relating to the reward fund . He said the House reconsidered the bill on Tuesday and voted unanimously again to pass the measure , and that Senate action is expected today . Higgins added that Lowery , a close friend of the Rogers family , has become increasingly concerned about terrorist attacks in this country . `` I think Bill was concerned about the larger issue of terrorist acts occurring on U.S. soil and wanted to provide an incentive for resolution of these types of cases while working in close concert with the FBI , '' Higgins said . `` It just so happens that , regrettably , what we believe to be the first incident occurred in his congressional district . '' Richard A. Serrano reported from San Diego and Ronald J. Ostrow reported from Washington .