I ai n't gon na play Sun City . -- Artists United Against Apartheid , 1985 I ai n't gon na play Sun City . . . or Phoenix . . . or Tempe . . . or Tucson . -- Football United Against Arizona , 1990 America in the 1990s is a country infatuated with symbols , where the burning of a flag can inflame the public fervor but the plight of the homeless ca n't ; where Just Say No buttons are considered the solution to the drug problem ; where one glib catch-phrase about reading lips can decide a presidential election ; and where Arizona can be branded the new Pretoria because its voters rejected a Martin Luther King Jr. holiday . That 's the thing about symbols : They 're simple . They 're not messy . They make us feel better about ourselves because they enable us to take a stand without getting sweaty or dirty or personally involved . This is why the NFL decides to fight racism by threatening to pull the 1993 Super Bowl out of Phoenix -- and not addressing the issue of why the league has but one black head coach and no black general managers . This is why college football jumps on the same bandwagon by threatening to move the Fiesta Bowl from Tempe and castigating teams for accepting bids to Tucson 's Copper Bowl -- but shrugs its shoulders at a system that exploits black athletes for millions of entertainment dollars , only to shove them out four years later without degrees or , worse , as functional illiterates . Of course , it is an embarrassment that Arizona voted against a Martin Luther King holiday . It is also an embarrassment that two other states , Montana and New Hampshire , fail to observe the same holiday . But why make it an issue now ? Arizona has been without a Martin Luther King holiday since 1987 . Why was there no outcry when the NFL first awarded the Super Bowl to Phoenix ? Why was there no protest when Bill Bidwill decided to move his Cardinals from St. Louis to Phoenix ? Why were there no condemnations when Notre Dame and West Virginia chose the Fiesta Bowl for their national championship showdown ? And if Arizona is to be blacklisted as a racist state , what is big-time sports going to do about the rest of the country ? What about San Diego , where voters refused to rename Market Street as Martin Luther King Jr. Way , where the board of port commissioners refused to name the new convention center after King ? What about New Orleans , where the 1990 Super Bowl was staged despite the fact that David Duke , a former Ku Klux Klan member , was holding a public office in the state of Louisiana ? What about Miami , where the 1989 Super Bowl was staged while race riots raged in the streets ? What about Charlotte , home to the NBA Hornets and the type of sentiment that can reelect Sen. Jesse Helms , the old segregationist who based his recent campaign on an anti-affirmative action platform ? What about Birmingham , where some of this nation 's bloodiest racial skirmishes were fought and where the All-American Bowl is still played ? What about Washington , D.C. , where the NFL team that plays in the nation 's capital is known as the Redskins ? What about Cleveland , which has a baseball team known as the Indians ? What about Boston , home to the whitest baseball team in the land ? Here is where the best black player in the history of the franchise , Jim Rice , retires and the Red Sox honor him by having Rice share his `` day '' with Bob Stanley , who was nothing more than an average white relief pitcher . And what about the frightening kind of Al Campanis thought that still permeates much of major-league baseball ? In the dugouts and the press boxes of the American League , you hear it whispered that the reason the Toronto Blue Jays do n't win is because they have `` too many Dominicans '' -- replete with all the hoary stereotypes : They 're too hot-headed , they do n't play together , they fold under pressure . Too often , these whispers are acknowledged only by a nod . The problem with big-time sports entering the political arena on one issue is that it leaves itself open to hypocrisy on so many others . Racism in sports , as in society , begins at home -- and neither the NFL nor the NCAA has its own house entirely in order . No doubt , racism figured in the defeat of the Arizona King Day . But the outcome is clouded by a variety of outside factors , including the NFL itself . A week before the election , it was leaked -- or planted ? -- that the NFL would consider pulling the Super Bowl if Arizona rejected the King measure . Previously , several polls had indicated that voters would pass the initiative by a 10- to 15-point margin . But many perceived the leak-plant as blackmail , dug in their heels , and voted no simply over principle . The NFL made itself an issue when the only one that should have mattered was the proper honoring of a great civil rights leader . After the fact , it is too easy to grandstand ; it is difficult to look bad by taking the anti-Arizona stand on this one . The NFL and the NCAA can do much better , much more . How about some affirmative action inside NFL front offices and within NFL coaching staffs ? What about taking NCAA television money and using it to increase educational opportunities for minorities ? Ironically , the Fiesta Bowl stands to do more real good by staying and playing than symbolically pulling out . The bowl is planning to pay each team an additional $ 100,000 , to be earmarked for minority scholarship programs . That is n't as dramatic as moving the bowl to another state . Only more constructive .