How do we describe someone who is intensely aware of the composition and consequences of every bit of food he or she eats , and takes pains not to ingest anything offensive ? A sensible eater ? A sensitive person ? A gourmet ? A nutritionist ? How about a food fuss ? Miss Manners is not unsympathetic to the current interest in food from dietary , aesthetic and political standpoints . She has always appreciated the traditional religious and ceremonial considerations . She understands about allergies , scruples and preferences . But enough is enough . She can no longer tolerate people talking when their mouths ought to be full . It 's ruining her appetite . What is more , it is ruining modern social life . The pretense of being grateful for whatever refreshment is offered has disappeared into a self-righteous demand for menu control . Guests are announcing what they want and what they disapprove of . Those who consider themselves polite do it beforehand , kindly allowing the hosts time to fill their orders . Those who do n't care , do it right at the table . Hosts are being advised to be extra careful not to offend their guests by serving -- well , any of the major or minor food groups . There is n't anything that someone is n't allergic to , or against . The list includes : alcoholic beverages , animal fats , veal , shellfish , nuts , saturated fats , pork , eggs , fried foods , game , sugar , heavy sauces , red meat , butter , starches , organ meats , heavy desserts and caffeine . Kind of simplifies your dinner planning , does n't it ? Rather , Miss Manners suggests that people put their energy into fighting back against the food fusses . We all agree that everybody does not eat everything . That is not the issue . There are polite rules for avoiding what you do n't want : * If you are serving yourself , from a tray or a buffet table , do n't take it . Take what you can eat and leave the rest . * If you are given something you do n't eat , mess up the plate a bit ( sure , you know how -- Miss Manners saw you hiding your vegetables under your potatoes when you were a mere toddler ) . * If your list of things you do n't eat covers everything served at a normal meal , then eat before you go out . Take a minimum amount for messing-up purposes . We do n't want to waste food , but we do n't want to waste the hosts ' energies , either , by making them rush around trying to find something to please you . * If you are worried about truly hidden ingredients -- ubiquitous foodstuffs that are not easily detected , but to which you have a serious reaction -- you are allowed one whispered word to the hosts , or a reminder in advance to those with whom you dine often . * Do n't discuss food . ( If Miss Manners were n't so polite , she would say , `` For heaven 's sake , shut up about it . '' ) Nobody is interested in hearing about what you do n't eat . Do n't announce it , and refuse to be led into any discussions about it . If prodded , just smile happily and decline what is offered , refusing to supply an explanation . Miss Manners is fighting this battle for the sake of beleaguered hosts , so she feels she must make her own requests of them , in their interest .