Officials at St. Joseph Medical Center in Burbank marked the start of construction on a $ 70-million cancer treatment center Tuesday with a ceremony preceded by a celebratory Mass . The Most Rev . Armando Ochoa , auxiliary bishop in Los Angeles , officiated at the ceremony and blessed the ground on which the six-story , 170,000-square-foot Robertson Tower will be built . A North Hollywood businessman and his wife who donated $ 7 million toward construction of the center were among about 150 people who attended the 11 a.m. ceremony at the entrance to the hospital , at Buena Vista Street and Alameda Avenue . Big Bear residents Jack Robertson , 51 , owner of Robertson Honda , and his wife , Diane , 52 , said their contribution was made in honor of their late parents . `` The Sisters of Providence are such a wonderful and dedicated group of women that we wanted to do something to support them , '' said Diane Robertson , whose parents died of cancer . The Sisters of Providence founded the nonprofit hospital in 1944 . With 647 beds , it is the largest health-care facility in the San Fernando Valley and the largest Catholic hospital in the state , officials said . The new center will feature state-of-the-art facilities for cancer detection , treatment , education and research , said Richard E. Horowitz , the hospital 's director of pathology . Hospice and family counseling facilities will be included in the expansion , scheduled to be completed in early 1992 , he said . 'It 's estimated that one in four people in our service area -- some 300,000 citizens -- will encounter cancer in their lives , '' Horowitz said . `` The expanded cancer program will allow us to significantly enhance the medical center 's already strong cancer program . '' Also planned are new intensive care and mental health units , a laboratory for diagnosis of vascular diseases and expanded facilities for diagnosis in radiology and nuclear medicine . With the Robertsons ' contribution , the hospital foundation has raised nearly $ 13 million of its contribution goal of $ 15 million for the cancer center , hospital officials said . Tax-exempt bonds and hospital operating fees will generate the balance of the $ 70 million , officials said . Also attending the ceremony were Burbank Mayor Robert R. Bowne , City Manager Robert Ovrom , and Councilmen Michael Hastings and Michael Flavin .