In the decade since rent control was imposed in Santa Monica , no one has ever been elected or appointed to the city 's Rent Control Board who was not associated with the powerful tenant political group Santa Monicans for Renters ' Rights . And although there is some question whether tenants will back an SMRR-supported ballot measure or a competing one sponsored by landlords , there seems little doubt that the tradition of an all-SMRR rent board will continue after the Nov. 6 city election . `` There may be some confusion out there among tenants about the ballot measures , but I believe they realize that SMRR is still their best bet to protect affordable housing and tenants ' interests on the board , '' said Jay Johnson , an SMRR member who was appointed to the board earlier this year and is now seeking election to a full four-year term . The challengers to SMRR 's slate of four candidates acknowledge that they face an uphill battle in stopping the tenants group 's winning streak . `` People have told me I ca n't win without the SMRR endorsement , but I 'll give it my best shot , '' said Barbara Miller , a tenant who is running an independent campaign after failing to receive the organization 's endorsement . Because of a resignation last year , four of the five seats on the board are up for election . Six candidates are competing for the three full four-year terms . A separate election to fill the last two years of an unexpired term has drawn two candidates . For the full-term seats , SMRR has endorsed incumbent Johnson , an apparel sales representative ; Suzanne Abrescia , a child development specialist , and Lisa Monk Borrino , a tenant attorney . Landlord Ed Simonian , a chemical engineering firm manager , and two tenants , law school student Robert Madok and Miller , a certified shorthand reporter , are the other candidates . The candidates for the two-year term are Robert Niemann , a substitute math teacher who has been endorsed by SMRR , and James L. Jacobson , a property management consultant who ran unsuccessfully for the board in 1984 . The four candidates with the SMRR endorsement are running coordinated campaigns . Rent board Commissioner Dolores Press is serving as campaign chairwoman for all four , and David Borrino , a Santa Monica deputy city attorney and husband of Lisa Monk Borrino , is their campaign treasurer . Simonian , Madok and Jacobson have formed a loose alliance to challenge the SMRR slate . Miller is running independently . Rather than personalities , the campaign up to now has focused on the candidates ' support or opposition to two ballot measures : Proposition U , backed by landlords , and Proposition W , which SMRR supports . Proposition U would remove the provision of Santa Monica 's rent control laws that rankles landlords the most : the section that maintains rent control even when a tenant vacates an apartment voluntarily . If Proposition U is adopted , landlords would be able to raise rents to whatever level the market will bear when voluntary vacancies occur . Proposition W , a competing measure placed on the ballot by the City Council at SMRR 's request , would allow rents on voluntarily vacated apartments to rise to specific higher levels based on the number of bedrooms . The rents allowed by Proposition W would be significantly higher than what is now permitted in many cases , but still well below free-market levels . Predictably , all four candidates on the SMRR slate oppose Proposition U and support Proposition W. Simonian , Madok and Jacobson all favor Proposition U and oppose Proposition W. Independent candidate Miller opposes both measures , saying that Proposition U would bring about the end of rent control in the city , and that Proposition W does n't provide adequate protection from landlord harassment . In the campaign for the ballot measures , both sides have been using scare tactics . Tenant advocates say that if Proposition U passes it will mean the end of affordable housing in Santa Monica , and landlords predict that if it does n't pass more landlords will go out of business under the state Ellis Act . The Ellis Act , adopted in 1986 , allows landlords to legally evict tenants and go out of business , provided they give adequate notice and pay relocation fees . Owners of more than 1,100 units have notified city officials of their intent to evict tenants . Two of the candidates -- one from each slate -- have had personal experience with the Ellis Act . Abrescia was evicted from her apartment under Ellis three years ago , and Madok is now under the threat of an Ellis eviction . Madok said his situation is evidence that landlords need relief provided by Proposition U , while Abrescia said her experience reinforced her belief that tenants still need the protection of rent control . The SMRR candidates say they would bring with them a new spirit of cooperation with landlords , but at least one opposing candidate is skeptical . `` They would be a duplicate of the existing board , '' said Simonian . Following are brief backgrounds on each of the candidates , in the same order as on the ballot : Jay P. Johnson , 47 , was appointed to the rent board to replace Julie Lopez Dad in March as a compromise candidate after a split board could not agree on several other candidates . Johnson is a landlord , but has been active in SMRR , including sitting as a member of SMRR 's steering committee . He said he believes there needs to be better `` integration and coordination '' between the rent board , City Council , Planning Commission and the office of community and economic development over housing issues . `` We have to protect the rental housing stock , '' he said . According to the financial statement he filed with the city clerk , Johnson has raised $ 1,210 for his campaign -- including a $ 300 personal loan -- and spent only $ 257 . However , he and the three other SMRR candidates enjoy the benefits of more than $ 160,000 raised by the group for slate literature and phone banks . Ed Simonian , 51 , owns two buildings with a total of nine units . Only his six-unit building is under rent control . Simonian says he supports rent control , but says the law should be applied in a more balanced way toward landlords . He supports Proposition U , but says that he and other small-scale landlords will be slow to benefit from it because the turnover rate is extremely low for rent-controlled apartments . Nonetheless , he says , the passage of the measure will have a `` psychological effect of giving ( landlords ) hope . '' He said disputes should be handled through mediation to avoid clogging up the courts and that landlords and tenants should be allowed to negotiate rent increase and pass-through costs . Simonian raised $ 1,275 and had not spent any of it as of Sept. 30 . Suzanne Abrescia , 40 , has been involved in tenant organizing for several years and formed a support group three years for tenants like herself who were evicted under the Ellis Act . `` I feel there is a need for rent control as long as there are abuses in rent control , '' she said . Abrescia considered a run for the board in 1988 but decided not to after other candidates whose views she shared entered the race . She is part of a group of slow-growth advocates within SMRR , a group that has become increasingly outspoken in recent months amid mounting criticism of some pro-development votes cast by SMRR members on the City Council . Abrescia has raised $ 908 and spent $ 351 , according to her campaign statement , but most of her campaign is being waged as part of the SMRR slate . Lisa Monk Borrino , 35 , says she has defended more than 200 evictions in Santa Monica , West Hollywood and Los Angeles as a tenant attorney for five years . Borrino said that without rent control , monthly rents would rise to the levels found in Marina del Rey , where rent control was removed five years ago . She said she would work to improve the relationship between the board and landlords . `` I think landlords have to be treated with respect , '' she said . `` I do n't have a 'them-versus-us ' attitude . '' Borrino , part of the SMRR slate , has raised $ 1,340 and spent just $ 32 for her individual campaign . Barbara Miller , 46 , said she decided to run for the rent board after fighting off two eviction attempts by her landlord . `` I want to help prevent others from undergoing the constant stress and pressure these proceedings cause , '' she said . She opposes any changes to the current rent control law and is alone among the candidates in opposing both propositions U and W. Miller , who is endorsed by current board member Wayne Bauer , says the board needs an independent candidate such as herself who `` does n't owe anything to anyone else . '' Miller filed a statement saying she did not intend to raise or spend more than $ 1,000 during the campaign . Robert Madok , 26 , is a law student at USC who has lived in Santa Monica for less than three years . He said he favors Proposition U over Proposition W because it would protect current tenants from rent increases while offering landlords enough of an incentive to stay in business . He says the board must also be more consistent in dealing with rent increases and decreases . Based on his dealings with other tenants in his building , he says he believes most tenants are willing to pay a little more in rent to keep their apartments . Madok filed a statement saying he did not intend to raise or spend more than $ 1,000 . Robert Niemann , 50 , is a half-owner of a four-unit apartment building in Santa Monica . He was involved in bringing rent control to Santa Monica in 1979 even though he was living in Venice at the time . As part of the SMRR slate , Niemann supports establishing a fund to subsidize rent increases for low-income tenants . Niemann also advocates a better relationship with landlords . `` Maybe by being less confrontational , landlords will come to the conclusion that apartments are still a good investment if they stay in it for the long haul , '' he said . Niemann raised $ 1,390 and spent $ 204 . James L. Jacobson , 38 , is a tenant but works for landlords dealing with the rent board . Jacobson says his eight years of dealing with the board and rent control regulations make him the most qualified candidate for the job and would allow him to bring a sense of history to the board . He says landlords , particularly the small owners , need relief and need to be treated fairly and with respect by the rent board if they are to stay in business . `` I have come to the conclusion that if the law was fairly applied , it would not be a system that apartment owners would love , but it would be one they could live with , '' he said . Jacobson is promoting a 10-point proposal , including rent adjustments based upon percentages rather than set dollar amounts . Jacobson reported raising $ 2,280 and spending $ 446 .