Australian television magnate Christopher C. Skase , under pressure from banks and regulators after the failure of his takeover bid for Hollywood 's MGM/UA studio , declared that his Qintex Australia company is still solvent . Skase , Qintex chairman , has spent much of the past two days huddled with his bankers after announcing that the company had run into a $ 150-million ( $ 200 million Australian ) drop in cash flow . The flamboyant Skase , who until this week was regarded as one of Australia 's richestpeople , found that his aborted $ 1.5-billion takeover bid for the studio left him strapped for cash . Shares of Qintex Australia and those of its 53 % owner , Qintex Ltd. , have been suspended from trading on the Australian Stock Exchange since Monday amid concern about their U.S. associate 's application for bankruptcy protection . In a statement Thursday in response to stock exchange queries about his finances , Skase said Qintex Australia could meet its financial commitments with the continued support of its lenders , who had been presented with its business plan for the financial year . `` The group 's bankers are reviewing the information presented , '' he said . Skase stuck by his forecast , made earlier this week , that Qintex Australia 's profit before interest , tax and depreciation for the year to July 31 , would top $ 128 million ( $ 170 million Australian ) despite the reduced cash flow . But he said the results were not yet final and had not been approved by directors and auditors . Qintex Australia 's crisis was triggered by its 43 % -owned Qintex Entertainment Inc. , which filed for protection from creditors over a $ 5.9-million loan last Friday . Skase said Qintex Australia had made unsecured loans of almost $ 38 million ( $ 50 million Australian ) to Qintex Entertainment . Qintex Entertainment 's $ 35 million in bank loans was secured on its assets , supported by a Qintex Australia guarantee , he said . Skase has already announced plans to sell assets to help solve Qintex Australia 's debt problems .