The eerie lights go up , the spooky stage smoke clears and what looks like a seven-foot-tall ghost of Marley appears wearing stunning fluorescent ghoul makeup and cobwebby grave clothes . It 's clear that this `` Christmas Carol '' is going to be an exciting blend of spectacle , special effects and surprises . Local director Tim Glasby has mounted an ambitious version of the Charles Dickens classic in the intimate 100-seat Center Stage Theater . The 21-member cast , who play 40 characters , is headed by Equity actors John Fink as Marley and Richard Stretchberry as Ebenezer Scrooge . The massive set , based on four rotating wagons , features a curved bridge large enough to hold a phalanx of carolers in Victorian dress who sing between scenes . We sympathize with the poor Cratchit family , root for Tiny Tim and follow the metamorphosis of that archetypal miser Scrooge , who stomps and humbugs his way through rapidly shifting scenes -- from Christmas Past , Christmas Present and Christmas Future . The first scenes reveal that Ebenezer was a solitary , neglected child who grew up to be a lonely , isolated man , insulated from all human feeling . When Christmas Future reveals his unmourned death , Scrooge suffers profound anguish over his miserly years and feels a genuine need to make something of what is left of his life . The test of an actor is here . Scrooge must change in one moment from curmudgeon to jovial gift-bringer . Stretchberry is up to it . He builds the change slowly with superb control . When we finally see him hopping and singing with joy on Christmas morning , we can believe this . And we believe that Scrooge is a symbol of Everyman and that every man harbors a streak of Scrooge . This is a good holiday show for the whole family . The children will love the special effects . One little girl at the performance I attended turned to her friend afterward and said , `` It was perfect . '' Proceeds from the show benefit the Youth Incentive Project of Santa Barbara County . WHERE AND WHEN '' A Christmas Carol , Scrooge and Marley , '' adapted from the Charles Dickens original by Israel Horovitz , at the Center Stage Theater , 721 De la Vina St. , on the second level of the Paseo Nuevo Shopping Center in downtown Santa Barbara . Plays at 8 p.m. today through Sunday . Matinees at 2 p.m. Saturday and Sunday . Tickets $ 14 , $ 12 children and seniors . Call 963-0408 .