Mission Viejo High School 's defense beat El Toro , 21-9 , before an overflow crowd of 8,000 at Mission Viejo Friday with the South Coast League title on the line . The operative word here is beat . `` This win will go down in Diablo lore , '' said Mike Rush , Mission Viejo coach . Mission Viejo stuffed El Toro 's running game and even managed to slow its passing attack . Except for a touchdown on its first series , El Toro managed only a safety . The victory puts Mission Viejo ( 8-1 , 4-0 in league play ) a victory away from the outright league championship and means the Diablos will be the top-seeded team from the South Coast League . Mission Viejo also could take over the county 's No . 1 ranking next week . El Toro ( 8-1 , 3-1 ) had been top-ranked since the season started . If you throw out that first drive , El Toro seemed like a discouraged team for most of the showdown . Mission Viejo could thank Bill Denny , a strong safety who plays more like a linebacker , and Beau LeBreton , a defensive end , for that . The two seemed to be in El Toro 's backfield constantly , either slamming a running back to the turf or pressuring quarterback Rob Johnson . LeBreton had three sacks and swatted away a key third-down pass on the Mission Viejo 17-yard line late in the game . It was one of many times El Toro drove deep into Mission Viejo territory but came away without scoring . `` We knew what we had to do . . . shut down Rob , shut down ( running back Bret ) Sanders , make the big plays and execute , '' LeBreton said . It all worked flawlessly . In the second half , Mission Viejo : -- Held El Toro on downs at the Mission Viejo five . -- Intercepted a Johnson pass at its own 36 . -- Stopped El Toro twice more on downs before game 's end . `` I think I 'd have to credit their defense , '' said Bob Johnson , El Toro coach . `` They stopped us when they had to . This is a tough loss for us . Real tough . '' Tim Snowden , Mission Viejo quarterback , threw touchdown passes to three different receivers as the Diablos led , 21-7 , at halftime . After Johnson hit Darren Doalson with a simple screen pass that turned into a 19-yard touchdown play , Snowden got hot . He completed a four-yard lob to Doug Roberson with 3:41 left in the first quarter . In the second quarter , he completed touchdown passes of 24 yards to Denny and 14 yards to Anthony Ramirez . After halftime , Mission Viejo turned the game over to its defense . The Diablos did n't plan it that way ; it just happened . Snowden completed 11 of 20 passes for 133 yards to Johnson 's 16 for 31 for 215 yards and one interception . Snowden came into the game completing 68.4 % of his passes ; Johnson 71.4 % . `` I told the kids last week that they were special , '' Rush said . `` We 've dwelled on that . Nobody thought much of us at the beginning of the year . ''