A handwritten letter that could help change the nasty reputation of Ty Cobb sold for $ 5,225 at auction . Cobb wrote the letter Jan. 25 , 1953 , to Brooklyn Dodgers first baseman Gil Hodges , who was criticized for going hitless in 21 at-bats during the 1952 World Series . The letter was auctioned off Thursday in Manhattan . `` I think you can make all of them eat their words the coming season and this is not psychology , '' wrote Cobb , a member of the Hall of Fame and for many years baseball 's all-time hit leader . `` You have the power , nothing wrong with eyes , then it has to be wrong fundamentals , stance , body balance and position , stance as to plate position , grip on bat . '' Cobb also wrote that `` when hazing young players was in vogue naturally I received my share . '' As a result , he said , `` I developed a 'feeling ' for every young player . '' Hodges ' team lost the series to the New York Yankees in seven games . The letter 's kind tone clashes with Cobb 's reputation . He was described in the `` Total Baseball '' encyclopedia as `` mean , vindictive , selfish , vain , a bully , a racist , paranoid , cruel and hot tempered . '' In 24 years starting in 1905 , Cobb hit .367 , with 4,191 hits , 1,961 RBIs and 892 stolen bases . Cobb indicated in the letter that he had helped other young players improve their games . He wrote he had `` been rewarded much only by appreciation expressed , also in watching box scores for evidence of better results gained by the player and secretly to myself enjoyed thinking I might have had a part in the improvement . '' He invites Hodges to write to him for three or four simple tips on improving his game . Cobb added the `` only stipulation there is no publicity crediting me . '' `` I have been in deep water myself and no one to help me , I enjoy helping others on that score alone , '' he said . Cobb died in 1961 . The auction was staged by Harmon Darvick Autograph Auctions . At the same auction , a scrap of paper bearing the shaky signature of the disgraced , illiterate baseball player `` Shoeless '' Joe Jackson sold for $ 23,100 . While other autographs have sold for more when they appear on letters and documents , the Jackson signature is on a shred of paper -- just 4 by 1 1/2 inches -- cut from a legal document Jackson signed in April , 1936 . The $ 23,100 price was the second-highest ever paid at auction for an unattached signature ; the record of $ 56,000 was paid for the rare signature of Button Gwinnett , a signer of the Declaration of Independence . Jackson hit .356 , third-highest in history , during a 13-year career that ended when the commissioner of baseball banned him and seven other Chicago White Sox players for accepting money to throw the 1919 Series with Cincinnati .