Wheelchair-bound since 1928 because of polio , Helynn Hoffa has accumulated a lifetime 's worth of practical tips on overcoming handicaps , including a childhood pep talk from President Franklin D. Roosevelt . In conjunction with Oxnard College instructor Gary Morgan , the 70-year-old La Jolla woman has written a self-help book for the disabled covering everything from dating and independent living to education , careers and world travel . Former Surgeon General C. Everett Koop commended the 309-page trade paperback , `` Yes You Can , '' for offering `` extraordinary help for disabled people and those who care for them . '' Hoffa , who met Roosevelt at age 12 while undergoing therapy in Warm Springs , Ga. , said he asked her what she wanted to be . `` I shrugged and told him I was n't sure I could be anything . '' She said he told her : `` Just remember this , if I can be in a wheelchair and be president of the greatest country in the world , you can do or be whatever you want to be . '' Hoffa , a onetime sportswriter , radio personality and art teacher , said she wrote the book with Morgan `` to save other people the years I wasted while I floundered around not knowing how to work toward a goal . '' Nearly 36 million Americans suffer some form of disability , said Morgan , 47 , an English and journalism instructor . He said many can benefit from such simple devices as an easy-to-grasp ball that arthritis victims can use to hold a pen for writing . Morgan , who has also written three books on Colorado railroads and a volume of poetry , said he wrote the chapters in `` Yes You Can '' on employment , computers and legal rights and also compiled the appendix of addresses and phone numbers for assistance organizations , clubs and foundations . Hoffa wrote the motivational chapters and practical tips , such as how to choose a personal care attendant and suitable housing arrangements . She said disabled people should not resign themselves to being crippled but should take advantage of every opportunity presented and every hand extended . `` Everyone of us has a Mt . Everest in our lives , '' Hoffa said . `` We all need a band of Sherpa guides to get there . No one stands atop Everest alone . '' CHRISTOPHER PUMMER