Former President Richard M. Nixon , speaking at a farewell banquet Wednesday evening , told his Chinese hosts that the June crackdown on pro-democracy protests `` will inevitably color American opinion and behavior toward China . '' `` The fact is that many in the United States , including many friends of China , believe the crackdown was excessive and unjustified , '' Nixon said in a toast to Chinese President Yang Shangkun , one of the key people responsible for ordering troops into Beijing to crush the protests . `` The events . . . damaged the respect and confidence which most Americans previously had for the leaders of China . '' Nixon acknowledged that `` many Chinese leaders deeply believe that the American reaction represents an intrusion in their internal affairs , '' adding : `` The age-old clash of ideas that now divides our nations is clear : the assertion of sovereignty of the state versus the universal rights of man . '' Nixon , a copy of whose speech was made available to the foreign press , said that U.S. sanctions against China and criticism of the crackdown have caused Chinese leaders to `` recall bygone days when their nation was bullied and exploited by outside powers . '' `` As a result , '' he said , `` some Chinese now exhibit a distrust of the United States that is reminiscent of the period before 1972 . The death of innocent people was a great tragedy , but another tragedy would be the death of a relationship and of policies that have served so well . We must not permit our real enemies -- misunderstanding , fruitless resentment , endless recrimination -- to close the door we opened with such high hopes 17 years ago . '' Nixon , who is to leave China today after a six-day visit , said that after 20 hours of `` frank and wide-ranging '' discussions with Chinese leaders , he still can not say with certainty whether China will continue to move forward with reforms or whether it will again close its doors and `` revert to the stagnant situation that existed before . '' Yang , in a toast to Nixon , declared that `` Sino-U.S. relations are at a most difficult juncture , or , in other words , at a stalemate . '' `` This state of affairs is not of China 's making , '' Yang said . `` China 's U.S. policy remains the same . . . . It is the United States that has changed . '' Yang , whose remarks were summarized in a report by the official New China News Agency , said China has done nothing to hurt American interests or to impose its views and values on the United States , yet in recent months some Americans have become involved in China 's internal affairs and have judged events in China by American standards . `` They have forgotten , '' he said , `` the lesson of history : Only after waging an extremely arduous struggle for over a century did the Chinese people finally win their basic rights -- the independence of the state and the dignity of the nation . '' An American traveling with Nixon , who briefed reporters on the condition that he not be identified by name , said that Nixon has privately offered Chinese leaders several ideas on measures China might take to help restore friendlier ties . He said they include steps in the fields of commercial relations , human rights and educational exchanges . Specifically , he said , Nixon suggested that police stationed outside the U.S. Embassy stop carrying semiautomatic rifles . On Wednesday morning , Nixon chatted with pedestrians along a shopping street , then visited the U.S. Embassy for a noon speech to the staff . Late Tuesday night , for the first time since June , the guards with rifles had been withdrawn from outside the embassy , and they were also gone Wednesday . Embassy officials expressed optimism that they had been removed permanently . Guards armed with pistols remained on duty .