For the second week in a row , El Camino looked sluggish at the start of a Mission Conference football game . And quarterback Frank Dolce , the league 's best passer , never really got going . But the Warriors , ranked No.1 in the state by the JC Athletic Bureau and No . 3 nationally by the JC Grid-Wire , still managed a 29-12 victory over No . 20 Mt . San Antonio College . The home victory lifted El Camino 's record to 7-0 overall and 6-0 in the conference . Mt . SAC fell to 4-3 and 3-3 . Dolce had his worst performance of the season . In the first half , the 6-foot-1 , 200-pound sophomore threw two interceptions and completed only seven of 22 passes . He finished the night 13 of 30 for 206 yards and two touchdowns . El Camino 's running game and tough defense earned the victory against a Mt . SAC club that was held scoreless in the second half . The Warriors held Leonard Russell , the league 's top rusher , to 125 yards . Running back Alfred Lowe led El Camino with 118 yards . `` Our defense won this game for us , '' said El Camino Coach John Featherstone . `` We were just sloppy on offense . '' El Camino did n't score until the end of the first quarter , on a 13-play , 59-yard drive . On fourth and six at the Mt . SAC 11-yard line , El Camino set up for a field goal . Instead Niu Sale ran up the left side for the touchdown . Lowe threw a pass to David Blakes for the two-point conversion , which put the Warriors up , 8-5 . El Camino drove 82 yards in six plays in its next possession . The drive was capped by Dolce 's 47-yard touchdown pass to Shannon Thompson . The Mounties got their only touchdown of the half when a long snap floated over El Camino punter Scott Peters ' head . On Mt . SAC 's second play Russell sprinted 21 yards into the end zone , narrowing the Warriors ' lead to 15-12 . Mt . SAC had scored in the first quarter on a safety and a 28-yard James Petrotta field goal . In the fourth quarter , El Camino scored on a 10-yard run by Al Savea , a Louis Perez field goal and a 10-yard pass from Dolce to David Blakes .