A recent ruling by the state Court of Appeal has lifted portions of the Los Angeles city rent control ordinance on trailer parks , jarring city officials and mobile home tenants who fear that rents will skyrocket . But an attorney for park owners said he doubted the impact would be great . The ruling leaves intact rent control restrictions on mobile homes installed before Oct. 1 , 1978 , but lifts the restrictions on those installed since then . Deputy City Atty . Gwendolyn Poindexter said Friday that the city is appealing the ruling , involving Los Olivos Mobile Home Park of Sylmar , to the state Supreme Court . At issue , Poindexter said , is the appellate court 's interpretation of a 1979 rent control ordinance , which applies to all mobile home parks and some apartments . The ordinance exempted apartments built after Oct. 1 , 1978 , from rent controls , she said . A three-judge panel ruled Sept. 16 that the ordinance also exempts mobile homes installed after 1978 , Poindexter said . Units installed before that date are still covered by rent control , which limits rent increases based on the consumer price index . The ruling creates problems probably not foreseen by the judges , Poindexter said . Under the ruling , if a mobile home owner replaces his unit with a new mobile home , that new home would not qualify for rent control , even if it occupies the same space as the old home , she said . This impact `` really discriminates '' against mobile home owners , said James A. Fleck , head researcher in the rent stabilization section of the Los Angeles Community Development Department . `` They are bound to keep old , dilapidated coaches in place . '' But Robert L. Weiss , an attorney for Los Olivos , said other Los Angeles ordinances ensure that mobile home owners would still be covered by rent control , even if they replace their units with new ones . There are 67 mobile home parks with 6,800 spaces in the city , most of them in the San Fernando Valley , Fleck said . City officials said it is unclear how many mobile homes in Los Angeles would lose the protection of rent control because of the ruling . Weiss said he doubted the ruling would have a wide impact . He said attorneys for the city and Los Olivos have identified only five mobile home parks , with a total of 533 spaces built after 1978 , which are unequivocally affected by the court 's ruling . Farris Robertson , a real estate agent and resident of Los Olivos , said some neighbors recently received letters telling them their rents would be raised because of the court ruling . One neighbor was told her rent would increase from $ 330 to $ 385 , he said . Robertson predicted that other park owners will follow suit as the ruling becomes better known . On Friday , Robertson asked the Los Angeles City Council to enact an emergency ordinance that would freeze mobile home rents until the Supreme Court can hear the Olivos case . The council took no action but said it would study the request .