The sprawling , air-conditioned hotel at the edge of the Amazon forest teemed with ideas for saving the world 's biggest tropical wilderness . It was a flourishing ecosystem of ideas , with the exuberance of a triple-canopy jungle , some ideas like towering trees , others like dense undergrowth and entwining vines . They sprouted from the mouths of conservationists , researchers , government technicians and officials ; they blossomed from photocopied treatises , slide projectors and posters ; they germinated on note pads and paper napkins . The lush proliferation of ideas left no doubt that an international conference called `` Forest 90 '' was a fertile theoretical environment . A sampling : Dirigibles will float over the wilderness , lowering in loggers to cut mature hardwood trees with as little damage to the forest as possible . New trees will be planted to replace the harvested ones , which will be hoisted into the sky and carried to nearby rivers , then floated to distant sawmills . No more logging roads slicing destructively through the fragile flora and fauna . Forest dwellers will not only tap rubber and gather Brazil nuts , as they do today , but also will collect foods , medicinal plants , gums , fibers , dyes , oils and other products for marketing in Brazil and abroad . Useful species will be reseeded . In riverside settlements , processing plants and cottage industries will turn forest products into finished goods , providing needed jobs . Agricultural extension workers will help farmers cultivate combinations of trees that yield profitable crops on small plots , protecting the land from the erosion and hardening that can occur when the forest is removed . This sustained `` agroforestry '' will render unnecessary the slash-and-burn farming methods that have already destroyed so much native forest . Landowners will raise big , fast-growing Amazon fish in ponds covering a few acres , earning much more than they could by raising cattle on large tracts of cleared land . Waste from chicken coops at the edge of the water will feed the fish . Two million Amazon colonos , pioneer farmers from other parts of Brazil , have shown how the imperative of economic survival can devour virgin forest . Most colonos begin by planting traditional subsistence crops such as beans , corn and an abundant root crop called manioc on cleared forest land . When the soil wears out in two or three years , they clear more land . More rain forest disappears . Saving the forest , it was clear here , is not only a matter of curbing rapacious ranchers , but also of offering small farmers economic alternatives to destructive methods . Like the vast rain forest itself , the ideas for weaning farmers from the slash-and-burn cycle seemed to have no end . Plant manioc in combination with nitrogen-fixing legumes that will replenish and protect weak soils . Exploit unwooded river flood plains with intensive cultivation of rice or super-grasses to feed livestock . Grow shade-seeking perennial crops , such as pepper and cacao , under otherwise useless secondary forest growth , capoeira , on the deforested land . Develop more productive agroforestry `` consortiums '' of different crop trees that thrive together . The goal is to `` fix the man on the land '' with a sustainable system of production . `` For every year this person does n't have to move , it means ' X ' number of acres that are n't cleared , '' said John Butler , a consultant with the World Wildlife Fund . But Forest 90 's 1,200 participants -- environmentalists and government officials -- well knew that as deforestation chews away at Brazil 's Amazon region , ideas alone will not save the unmatched diversity of its myriad plants and animals . While the impressive flood of ideas offered hope for the Amazon , it also underlined a difficult challenge : A monumental effort is needed to sort out the various forest-saving possibilities and to put them into widespread practice . To accomplish the goal , new techniques must be taught , and other assistance delivered , to a rural population of 5 million in an area nearly three times as large as Alaska . That could require an army of agricultural extension agents . Currently , few results of Amazon agricultural research reach farmers in the field . Luiz Carlos Molion , a Brazilian climatologist and forest hydrologist , served himself a few chunks of river fish from the hotel 's luncheon buffet . `` This is tambaqui , but it 's undersized , '' said Molion , 43 , a stout man with a ruddy face and scraggly russet beard . `` They 're taking small fish from the rivers because the big ones are being fished out . '' Demand for tambaqui and other Amazon fish is high : A kilogram of tambaqui costs more than a kilogram of beef in Manaus , a city of more than a million people . Molion and others who know the Amazon say fish-raising in ponds could become a major source of food and income for the region 's people , with a low ecological cost . But so far , little has been done to implement the idea . Leonir Naumann is an exception rather than the rule . He operates a farm near the village of Bela Vista , 40 miles west of Manaus on the Upper Amazon River . And on his farm he has a fishpond , full of maturing tambaqui , tucunare and pirarucu . Naumann , 33 , walked along the shore and pointed to fish breaking the pond 's surface . He said he soon will take his first catch to market and his farm will begin to turn a profit for the first time in the 10 years he has owned it . He also has 135 head of dairy cattle , but he said poor Amazon soil makes pasture maintenance too expensive to be profitable . He wore sandals and blue shorts , and his tanned shoulders shone like copper under the midday sun as he stopped to make a simple calculation : Each cow requires 2.5 acres of grazing land , but 2.5 acres of fishpond will produce more than 150,000 pounds of tambaqui in three years . He feeds the fish dried cow manure and manioc -- a crop he also fertilizes with manure . About 740 acres of forest has been cleared from Naumann 's 4,300 acres of land , and he said he will cut no more . `` I am against deforestation , '' he said . `` There is a lot of deforested land and it is n't being used . '' More than 100,000 square miles of Brazil 's Amazon forest has been razed for pasture , an area larger than Oregon . An estimated two-thirds of that has degenerated into brush and the secondary forest growth , capoeira . Agroforestry has proved to be one of the most productive uses of cleared Amazon land . Over the years , Sebastiao Silva Martins , 65 , has planted a small jungle on his plot outside Bela Vista . His trees produce rubber , cacao , oranges , passion fruit , mangoes , palm peaches and cupuacu . Some thrive in the shade ; others grow high , seeking sunshine . The trees protect the fragile soil from hardening and erosion . They produce year after year . The tree farm does n't require much work , and Martins does n't have to spend money on such things as fertilizer . `` The fertilizer is just the leaves , '' he said . Like Naumann , Martins gets no help from agricultural extension workers or ecologists . He has learned which combinations of trees work best from talking with his neighbors and experimenting . In his small way , he has demonstrated that farming in the Amazon need not destroy the forest . The biggest controversy at the conference was about `` extractive reserves '' -- forest areas set aside for residents to exploit without destroying them . The government has created four extractive reserves with a total of 5.4 million acres and others are being planned . But debate goes on over whether they will be economically sustainable in the long run . Critics said prices for forest products such as natural latex , nuts and herbs can not adequately compensate for the time it takes to gather them . They contended that when demand increases for a forest product , it will be depleted -- or domesticated for more economical production on farms . Defenders of the concept argued that markets for new products must be developed . They predicted that the forest 's hundreds of thousands of plant species , many of them yet to be studied , will be a cornucopia of marketable new material . And they said forest areas can be `` enriched '' by planting . Americans interested in rain-forest conservation already have begun buying ice cream and other products made with Amazon ingredients . Some conference participants envisioned a boom in demand for `` rain-forest chic '' products . `` Either we find ways to preserve the forest and improve the lives of the people there , or 20 or 30 years from now there wo n't be any more researchers researching the forest , because there wo n't be any forest , '' said Julio Barbosa , a rubber-tappers union leader . Environmentalists and government officials at Forest 90 agreed that the Amazon should be zoned for forest preservation and controlled development . Jose Goldemberg , the national secretary of science and technology , said a regional zoning plan is being prepared and will be finished by 1992 . Alcir Meira , superintendent of the official Amazon development agency , said the agency is drafting its sixth plan for the region . The agency , known by the acronym SUDAM , dedicated much of its efforts in the past to fostering big cattle ranching projects in the Amazon , granting tax concessions and other incentives . But Meira said the new plan will emphasize ecological balance . `` What it will not permit anymore is to give incentives for cutting down forest for ranching , '' he said in an interview . Molion , the forest hydrologist , is creating a new Amazon agency called Unitrop that will distribute donated funds for research on ecologically compatible development and for extension work . He said one of the first projects to be sponsored by Unitrop will distribute minnows and teach farmers to operate commercial fishponds . `` You do n't need to cut the forest to plant and harvest it , '' he said . That , in essence , is the gospel according to Forest 90 . The future of the Amazon may rest largely on whether its message is heard .