An attempt to quietly remove a nearly century-old stone monument honoring white supremacists has sparked racial tensions and threatens federal funds for a construction project , officials said . City officials said the 20-foot obelisk must be removed because of road construction and because of commercial development of the area near the monument . `` They 're lying in their teeth , '' said Wayne Ponthieux of Boh Brothers Construction Co. Inc. , foreman of the crew doing the street work . `` I can work all around that monument . That monument does not have to be touched . '' None of the street work comes closer than 15 feet , he said . Streets Director Betty Jo Everett , who said that the move was forced by road work , said later last week that electrical and traffic engineers told her the obelisk might be damaged by the work . The monument also could block the view of traffic signals that will be installed after the road work is done , she said . `` It would be a safety hazard in the way that we have redesigned the intersection , '' said Everett . `` When uses change over the years , you have to make decisions for the safety of the public , both pedestrians and drivers . '' Erected in 1891 , the monument bears the names of 16 people , all members of the White League , who died in a brief , bloody battle in 1874 between the white supremacist group and the Reconstruction government . An inscription added in 1932 says : `` United States troops took over the state government and reinstated the usurpers but the national election in November 1876 recognized white supremacy and gave us our state . '' It 's the second time in eight years that an official in this predominantly black city has tried to remove the pointed pillar officially called the Liberty Place Monument . Everett said she gave the order to remove the monument without consulting Mayor Sidney Barthelemy , who is running for reelection in February , 1990 . Barthelemy has not publicly commented on the situation . While the road work continues , the order to remove the obelisk was put on hold until officials decide where it should go and whether moving it would violate federal law . Glenn Montecino , an aide to state representative and former Ku Klux Klan leader David Duke , said moving the obelisk could mean the construction project will lose federal funds since it could be a candidate for the National Register of Historic Places . Although the monument is n't yet on the National Register , federal rules require preservation officials be consulted before work starts at a site that might qualify for the register , said Leslie P. Tassin , Louisiana 's historic preservation officer . In the 1970s , blacks demanded removal of the monument , which had long been and continues to be a rallying point for white supremacists . Their demands were rejected , but a plaque repudiating the references to white supremacy was added in 1974 . Former Mayor Dutch Morial , the city 's first black mayor , advertised in 1981 for a firm to remove the monument from the center of a tiny traffic circle . The City Council said the obelisk had to stay , but agreed to let the 1932 inscriptions be removed . They were filled in , whitewashed over , and covered up . But the covers since have been removed , leaving bolts sticking out from partly erased inscriptions . The 1974 plaque also is nowhere to be seen . Morial 's move , like Everett 's order , sparked challenges from the National Assn . for the Advancement of White People , founded by Duke . Duke , former imperial wizard of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan , founded the NAAWP after repudiating the klan . He was elected last February to the state Legislature . The NAAWP held a small protest at the monument earlier this month in which about 20 people showed up . The group said it would be satisfied if the city assured it the monument would be erected somewhere within the 10 blocks covered by the Battle of Liberty .