William Fairbank , whose work in low-temperature superconductivity laid the foundation for hundreds of scientific experiments worldwide , has died . He was 72 . Fairbank , professor emeritus of physics at Stanford University , suffered a heart attack Saturday while jogging near the Palo Alto campus , university officials said . Fairbank researched the nature of superconductivity and participated in the search for gravity waves , subatomic particles called quarks , and monopoles , believed to be a component of magnetism . His work is the basis of a multimillion-dollar project to test a final unproven prediction of Albert Einstein 's general theory of relativity . Fairbank , who worked in his lab the night before his death , believed in what he called the `` Anti-Murphy Law of Physics . '' This held that when one understands an experimental situation correctly , three or four things come together to make the impossible possible . He performed his first superconductivity experiment in 1947 with his brother Henry , also a physicist . Laser Advancement Fairbank 's work centered on the ability of some materials to offer no resistance to an electrical current if they are cooled to near absolute zero . Stanford said Fairbank 's influence on physics included the development at Stanford of the superconducting accelerator in which a linear accelerator is cooled to 2 degrees above absolute zero . The superconductivity allows for greater degrees of sensitivity and led to the first demonstration of a free electron laser . His research often led into other areas . In 1975 he developed a machine in an experimental program that killed cancer cells without damage to organs or tissue . Designed for use on cancers of the mouth and throat and certain brain and lung tumors , the `` Medical Pion Generator '' used a stream of pions -- subatomic particles generated by a high-energy accelerator -- to kill the cells with minute nuclear explosions . Fairbank was born in Minneapolis , graduated from Whitman College in Washington and earned his Ph.D. from Yale University in 1948 . Before joining Stanford in 1959 , he taught at the University of Washington , Amherst College and Duke University and worked on the staff of the Radiation Laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology .