Films going into production : Agaguk ( tentative title ) ( Agaguk Films/Eiffel Prods. ) . Shooting in Montreal . Lou Diamond Phillips plays the title character in this look at a young Eskimo man who leaves the tribe in the '30s and settles in a more populated environment . Executive producers Charles Smiley and John Quested . Producer Claude Leger . Director Jacques Dorfmann . Screenwriters Rudolf Wurlitzer and Evan Jones . Distributor Goldcrest . Dance With Death ( Concorde ) . Shooting in Los Angeles . The seedier side of L.A. is dredged up in this thriller concerning exotic dancers and a terrorizing presence that lurks behind their every bump and grind . Producer Mike Elliott . Director Charles Phillip Moore . Screenwriter Daryl Haney . Stars Maxwell Caulfield , Mike McDonald , Rodger Hall and Maria Ford . Mobsters ( Universal ) . Shooting in Los Angeles . Heartthrobs Christian Slater , Patrick Dempsey and Richard Grieco are the top trio in this true-to-life account of organized crime 's heyday , circa 1917-1930 . Charles ( Lucky ) Luciano and legendary numbers man Meyer Lansky will be depicted , among others . Producer Steve Roth . Director Michael Karbelnikoff . Screenwriter Nick Kazan . Resident Alien ( Granite Prods. ) . Shooting in Minnesota . This sci-fi comedy concerns a UFO crash in a small Minnesota town and the effect it has on two of its down-on-their-luck inhabitants . Producer Dale Newton . Director John Gaspard . Screenwriter Newton . Stars Patrick Coyle , Nesba Crenshaw and Mark Gleason . Warshawski ( Chestnut Hill Prods. ) . Shooting in Chicago and Los Angeles . Kathleen Turner plays the tough-talking but sexy private eye from the best-selling Sara Paretsky series . Warshawski is hired by the 13-year-old daughter of a murder victim to nab the culprit but soon they 're both confronted with the seamier side of Chicago 's shipping industry . Executive producers Penney Finkelman Cox and John P. Marsh . Producer Jeffrey Lurie . Director Jeff Kanew . Screenwriting credit undetermined . Also stars Jay O. Sanders , Angela Goethals and Stephen Meadows . Distributor Buena Vista . Welcome to Buzzsaw ( Universal ) . Shooting in Santa Cruz . Buzzsaw is the fictional , barren logging town where financial broker Matthew Broderick has his wallet stolen . What 's significant about the theft is the phone number worth $ 60 million inside the trifold that Broderick must retrieve . Producers Robert Cort and Karen Murphy . Director Francis Veber . Screenwriters Joshua and Daniel Goldin . David Pecchia