IN COOKING , as in life , looks can be deceiving . Take steamed puddings . Though they appear complicated , steamed puddings are deceptively easy to prepare , requiring only patience and a small amount of work . Ingredients are quickly mixed together , poured into a buttered pudding mold , then steamed . The delicious concoction that emerges is a moist and elegant dessert bearing little resemblance to that `` speckled cannon-ball , so hard and firm '' that Charles Dickens lovingly described in `` A Christmas Carol . '' Once steamed , the puddings can be served immediately with hard sauce or left to mellow for several days , sometimes even several months , depending on the ingredients . With time , flavors merge , which makes a tastier pudding upon reheating . Steamed puddings also travel well , and they make terrific gifts . Two types of persimmons are available from October to January -- the large , flaming orange , acorn-shaped Hachiya and the smaller , lighter-colored , tomato- shaped Fuyu . Hachiyas have a tannic , acrid taste if they are eaten before the flesh has ripened to a soft , almost mushy consistency . The Fuyus , more delicate in flavor than the Hachiyas , have a firm , plum-like texture when ripe and are tannin-free . Both are equally delicious when used in baked goods , especially this steamed pudding . The accompanying Rum Butter is also known as hard sauce . It lasts for months in the refrigerator and also keeps well frozen . The recipe can be doubled and stored in one-cup containers . PERSIMMON PUDDING 3 tablespoons unsalted butter , softened 2 tablespoons plus 1 1/3 cups sugar 1/2 cup mixed dried fruit 1/3 cup golden raisins 1/4 cup currants 1/4 cup brandy 1 1/3 cups all-purpose flour 2 teaspoons ground cinnamon 1 teaspoon freshly grated nutmeg 1/2 teaspoon salt 2 large eggs , separated 1 1/2 teaspoons vanilla extract 1 1/2 teaspoons lemon juice 1 1/2 cups persimmon puree 1/2 cup half-and-half 1 teaspoon baking soda 1 tablespoon hot water 3/4 cup chopped pecans 1 cup Rum Butter or 1 cup whipped cream sweetened with 1 tablespoon of powdered sugar Butter sides and lid of 2-quart pudding mold with 1 1/2 tablespoons butter . Dust entire mold with 2 tablespoons sugar . Set aside . Prepare pot for steaming pudding ( see below ) . Soak dried fruit , raisins and currants in brandy . Sift flour , cinnamon , nutmeg and salt into small bowl . Set aside . In electric mixer or food processor , cream remaining butter and sugar with egg yolks , vanilla and lemon juice . Mix in persimmon puree and half-and-half . Dissolve baking soda in hot water and stir into persimmon mixture . Stir in sifted ingredients and pecans . In separate bowl , beat egg whites until soft peaks form . Carefully fold into batter . Pour batter into mold and place lid on top . Steam on rack over boiling water 2 hours and 20 minutes or until skewer inserted into pudding comes out almost clean . Remove mold to rack and cool 10 minutes before unmolding or until pudding shrinks away from sides of mold . Invert onto serving platter . Serve warm or cold with Rum Butter or sweetened whipped cream . Makes 8 servings . Rum butter is also known as hard sauce . It lasts for months in the refrigerator and also freezes very well . You can double the recipe and store it in 1-cup containers . RUM BUTTER 1/2 cup ( 1 stick ) unsalted butter , softened 1 1/2 cups powdered sugar , sifted several times 1/2 teaspoon vanilla extract 2-3 tablespoons Jamaican rum or brandy Beat all ingredients together until light and fluffy . Serve at room temperature or cover and refrigerate until ready to use . Makes 2 cups . NOTES : Pudding molds should only be filled 2/3 to 3/4 full so pudding can rise and expand . Always tap the pudding on counter several times to break up any air bubbles before tightly securing lid . Use deep , heavy stock ot or spaghetti cooker that is large enough to allow steam to circulate around whole pudding mold . Filled mold should rest on small rack , trivet or folded cloth placed on bottom of pot .