After years of debating what kind of art belongs alongside San Diego Bay , Louis Wolfsheimer wonders if the answer might be right under the port commissioners ' seven noses . Wolfsheimer , the San Diego Unified Port District board chairman , is n't sure how to put a price on the two Volkswagen-sized boulders that were recently extracted from the damaged hull of the Exxon Valdez . But pound for pound or ton for ton , he said Monday , the district would likely pay Exxon Shipping Co. a tidy sum for the chance to make one of the rocks into what he calls an `` environmental monument . '' `` Every time our people come up with a piece of art , the commission says it 's too avant-garde , '' Wolfsheimer said , noting that the district has more than $ 1.5 million set aside for public art expenditures , but has rejected most proposals . `` I think a boulder in its natural state might work , even with a little oil on it . '' Wolfsheimer 's whimsical proposal would secure a final resting place for one of the rocks , which became embedded in the Valdez 's steel hull March 24 when the ship ran aground off Alaska . But Exxon Shipping Co. officials , who are facing extensive litigation over the largest oil spill in U.S. history , say they are n't selling . `` As far as I know , it 's not for sale , '' said Les Rogers , an Exxon Shipping Co. spokesman , who said he knew of no plans to put either the 6-ton or the 10-ton boulder on display . `` I would n't see any particular advantage to the company in doing that . Exxon intends to maintain possession until litigation is over , years down the road . Then , who knows . '' Exxon 's resistance to making the boulders available is consistent with the Port District 's foiled attempts to buy public art . Last year , the Port District 's arts advisory committee , a six-member , blue-ribbon panel , resigned en masse . Their gripe : in four years , the advisory committee had recommended three artworks , all of which the port commissioners either rejected or revised so drastically that the artist withdrew . In the meantime , the Port District accepted two sculptures without its art committee 's help . Hugh Davis , director of the La Jolla Museum of Contemporary Art and a former member of the arts committee , called one of the pieces , a bronze casting of Charles Lindbergh , a `` gratuitous piece of kitsch . '' By offering to mount the boulder on a pedestal , Wolfsheimer said , he meant no affront to the art world . And , to environmentalists like Rick Nadeau of Greenpeace Action , who said he chafes at the idea of turning the Exxon Valdez into a tourist attraction , Wolfsheimer responded : `` It was supposed to be fun , educational , historical -- a way to remind people what can happen when you 're not careful . '' For his part , Wolfsheimer questioned how Exxon can claim ownership of what he calls `` the most famous boulders in the last century , '' which are being stored in locked steel boxes at the National Steel & Shipbuilding Co. , where the Valdez was built and now is being repaired . `` I ca n't imagine how they own it , '' he said . `` The Exxon Valdez was built in San Diego , it is being repaired in San Diego -- there 's a great connection between San Diego and the ship . If we do n't get ( the boulder ) , it should be placed in Alaska , where the Valdez picked it up . '' Wolfsheimer imagines that , if the Port District paid , say , $ 50,000 for a massive piece of history , the money could go toward cleanup of the spill . But , if Exxon wo n't part with it , he said , he 's not going to fight . `` This is n't my life 's work , '' he said . `` There 's a lot of things we have to accomplish at the port , and one of them is not suing Exxon . ''