Santa Claus sat near the starting cannon and a military band played Christmas carols today while soldiers of the 82nd Airborne enjoyed a five-mile Jingle Bell Jog . The run was part of a day off that included music , volleyball , a talent show and Christmas Eve services that were off-limits to the media because of Saudi Arabia 's strict religious laws . `` Christmas is where the heart is , and in the 82nd Airborne Division , everybody 's heart is in the right place , '' said the Santa Claus , Lt. Col. Bob Murphy , 43 , of Fayetteville , N.C . He was dressed in a Santa suit , complete with white whiskers and black boots . He handed out razor blades , candy , Frisbees , yo-yos and other gifts stashed in a brown garbage can liner . `` Sure , we 'd love to be home with our loved ones , but , my gosh , we got an important mission to do over here , '' Murphy said . The Army division 's band , led by Chief Warrant Officer Willie James Lockett , played `` Deck the Halls '' to entertain the troops . `` We 're doing this so the soldier wo n't be lonely and think about what it 's like back in the world where he is n't , '' said Lockett , 35 , of Jacksonville , Fla. , a 17-year Army veteran . `` My Christmas tree will be up whenever I get back . If it 's the year 2002 , that sucker will still be up . '' Chief Warrant Officer Ben Cooper , 30 , of Monticello , Ark. , finished first in the jog with a time of 24 minutes , 31 seconds . Keeping busy helped keep his mind off his wife and three children back home , he said . `` You try to stay occupied instead of sitting around moping ( and ) thinking about how bad off you are , '' Cooper said . Capt . Michael Thomas , 30 , of Trenton , N.J. , ran the race wearing a Santa 's cap and a pair of Bart Simpson shorts . He 's been away from home six times in the last eight years . He even saw a bright spot in spending Christmas in the desert . `` Actually , out here , we 're away from the commercial side of Christmas , '' he said . `` You have to look inside yourself to find the real Christmas spirit . '' Lt. Lisa Titus , 27 , of the Army 's 18th Airborne Corps , got time off to run the race with her husband , Greg , a captain who commands a battery of artillery with the 82nd Airborne . She sat on Santa 's lap but did n't make a Christmas wish .