We live in a society that is dictated by rules . There are rules for marriage , rules for raising children and even rules for war . So why should n't there be rules for dieting ? For years , I have contended that food eaten over the sink does n't count . It 's not like you 're sitting down enjoying something . The guilt alone burns off any caloric damage before it ever reaches . . . wherever it is food goes . That 's why I was delighted finally to see a breakthrough in dieting -- a list of rules found by a reader in New Jersey . For example , if you drink a diet soda with a candy bar , the calories in the candy bar are canceled out by the diet soda . Foods that have the same color have the same number of calories -- spinach and pistachio ice cream ; mushrooms and white chocolate . ( Chocolate , incidentally , is a universal color and may be substituted for any other food choice . ) And here 's one I 'll bet you did n't know : Food used for medicinal purposes never counts . That 's right , if you have a piece of dry toast with your hot chocolate or a cup of bouillon before your Sara Lee cheesecake , do n't even think about the consequences . Nutritionists probably already know this , but cookie pieces contain no calories . The process of crumbling causes `` caloric leakage . '' Tasting while you are cooking is considered a public service project , and public service is calorie-deductible . Movie-related foods such as Milk Duds , buttered popcorn and vat-sized soft drinks contain no calories whatsoever . They are part of an entertainment package and not part of one 's personal fuel . Anything offered by people demonstrating foods in a supermarket and samples set out in candy stores or bakeries do n't count in your daily intake of calories . Dieters are never penalized for good manners . I have been on this diet for three weeks now and love it . However , there is a side effect that is worth mentioning . The more I `` diet , '' the more rules I discover , and the more my consciousness is broadened . Among other things .