For all of the wild plays , all of the six touchdown passes during regulation -- only one shorter than 20 yards -- the clincher to Friday 's Point Loma-Orange Glen San Diego Section 3-A quarterfinal at Mesa College was a simple 10-yard pass during overtime . That and an interception . Point Loma quarterback Danny White completed the pass to Marlon Manassa , and when Point Loma 's Brett Callan intercepted a Daren Wilkinson pass two plays later , the game was over . Finally . The final score technically was 28-28 , but Point Loma scored three touchdowns to Orange Glen 's one during the California tiebreaker overtime to move Point Loma ( 8-4 ) into the section semifinals against the winner of tonight 's Rancho Buena Vista-Southwest game . Point Loma needed just two overtime touchdowns , but Callan ran 99 jubilant yards with his interception to end the game . This was after each team scored on its first overtime possession . Orange Glen took the ball first and scored on its second play . Wilkinson handed off to Noel Toloumu , who turned around and passed to Wilkinson in the end zone . David Napier made the conversion kick . Point Loma scored in more dramatic fashion . White passed 14 yards to J.J. Stokes on fourth and 14 . Orange Glen forced the overtime by scoring 15 points in the fourth quarter . Trailing , 28-13 , Wilkinson passed 25 yards to Chris Ybarra with 3:59 left to make it 28-20 . A minute and a half later , Orange Glen 's Gabriel Munoz recovered John Faulkner 's fumble at the Point Loma 35 . Four players later , Ryan Strathearn bowled over from the two . Orange Glen then tied the game when Toloumu caught Wilkinson 's pass for the two-point conversion . Undaunted , Point Loma nearly came back to win in regulation . White passed 16 yards to Stokes and 33 yards to Callan on the Pointers ' first two plays to give Point Loma first and 10 on the Orange Glen 15 with 16 seconds left . But Bob Simoneau missed a 33-yard field goal attempt . Strathearn 's two-yard run to tie the game was the shortest touchdown play in a wild game . White had touchdown passes of 80 , 59 and 19 yards to Stokes , and Manassa went 55 yards for a touchdown on a fake reverse . Meanwhile , Orange Glen 's Wilkinson passed 30 yards to Toloumu , 40 yards to 5-foot-8 , 130-pound sophomore Kris Plash and 25 yards to Ybarra . Orange Glen led at the half , 13-7 .