Sea World officials unveiled a proposal Wednesday to expand their parking lot onto 30 acres of city-owned land on Mission Bay on which a long-awaited city park is planned . The proposal , which will need City Council approval , calls for Sea World to spend up to $ 3 million to convert the 30 acres into essentially a large lawn divided into several baseball diamonds and athletic fields , some of which would be lighted for night games . Sea World would pay to maintain the fields , which would remain under the city 's jurisdiction . In return , Sea World wants exclusive access to the fields and grassy area during peak attendance periods at the aquatic theme park -- so it can park about 3,500 cars . Sea World officials say peak periods are July , August and school holidays . The need for overflow parking is not great now , Sea World officials told a City Council committee Wednesday , but the company 's projections show that attendance will nearly double by 2008 , to 6 million a year . The 30 acres are next to Sea World 's ocean of asphalt-covered parking lots , which accommodate about 6,600 vehicles . The land Sea World wants is part of the city 's 100-acre South Shores Park , which has been in planning for at least 10 years . This year , the city began work on the first phase of the park , which encompasses the 30 acres Sea World is seeking . The city has spent about $ 2 million grading the former landfill site and building a boat ramp and public restroom . It plans to spend another $ 2 million or so finishing the first phase by doing more grading and landscaping , building a 9-acre lagoon , an asphalt parking lot , a small beach and public pier , said John Leppart , an assistant to the city manager . The city is scheduled to get bids for the project in March . The other phases of the park , which are n't completely funded , would include more parking and large picnic areas . The finished park would cost about $ 8 million . Funding for the South Shores park is based in part on money from state grants and state park bonds . Sea World wants the city to ask those agencies whether a change in park plans to accommodate Sea World would delay or harm the city 's access to the funds . The council 's Public Facilities and Recreation Committee agreed Wednesday to do that , and city staffers said they expect to have an answer sometime next month . The committee stressed that it is not endorsing Sea World 's proposal , and Sea World of California President Robert K. Gault said the proposal is still conceptual . Although the configuration of the first phase of South Shores park would change , Gault said all the elements for the public , such as the boat ramp , would still be open even when Sea World has to use the playing fields for parking . As planned by the city , a large part of the land Sea World wants to plant with grass and use for overflow parking is designated as an asphalt-covered parking lot . Under Sea World 's plan , the parking lot would be moved and reshaped . Gault told reporters that people who use the playing fields during slack periods at Sea World could park in Sea World 's lots . `` In direct benefits to the city , Sea World contributes more rent income based on Sea World revenue than any other city tenant , '' Gault told the council committee . A Sea World spokesman said later that Sea World paid the city about $ 4 million in rent alone last year . Sea World 's lease with the city runs until 2033 . Gault told reporters that it would be too expensive to build a multistory parking garage on Sea World 's existing lots because of city height limits and the high ground-water table . The need for more parking will be exacerbated , Gault told the committee , because Sea World plans to turn 11 acres of what is now an asphalt-covered parking lot into an exhibit area . He declined to give details about the new exhibits because he does n't want to tip off competitors . Several people backed Sea World 's proposal , including a spokesman for the Old Mission Beach Athletic Club , said there is a great need in the beach area for playing fields . Not everyone , though , was ready to endorse the proposal , at least not without more analysis . Judy Swink of Citizens Coordinate for Century 3 , an urban planning group , recommended that Sea World find another way to accommodate its visitors , transportation alternatives . She warned that giving Sea World exclusive use of much of the 30 acres for parking would come at a time -- the middle of summer -- when use of Mission Bay by local residents is at its highest .