A good thing came in threes Thursday at the Orange County Performing Arts Center with the appearance of Joe Pass , George Shearing and Joe Williams in a program billed as `` A Gathering of Friends . '' The concert was presented as part of the Irvine Symphony Orchestra 's Performing Arts Center Series . Pass opened solo with a playful , yet polished , presentation of standards . The guitarist achieved an almost orchestral effect , backing single-note melody statements with smart chording and the infrequent bass lines , toying with rhythms and twisting familiar themes into something barely recognizable. `` 'Round Midnight '' opened at a gentle , reserved pace before shifting into swing . In an Ellington tribute , `` Mood Indigo '' evolved into `` Satin Doll '' with a line from `` Do n't Get Around Much Anymore '' thrown in near the end . Pass ' subtle ability to move between moods shone on Oscar Hammerstein 's `` It 's A Wonderful World , '' developing from a stately dance-like figure into a rich , rhythmic affirmation . The guitarist added percussion to his complex voicings with pops of his strings and infrequent taps on his instrument 's body . Shearing , in the company of bassist Neil Swainson , also stuck to familiar numbers , which he embellished with shifting textures and rhythms . Standouts included his moody reading of `` Misty '' and the crisp , unison statement between bass and piano on the theme to Miles Davis ' `` Donna Lee , '' the bop-era workhorse that Shearing managed to work into a barrelhouse rag . A particularly somber rendition of the World War I nostalgia tune , `` Lili Marlene , '' was full of foreboding derived from a minor key setting . And yes , Shearing played his signature tune , `` Lullaby of Birdland . '' Bassist Swainson seemed a perfect musical foil for his employer , supplying a steady walk , speedy theme statements in tandem with the keyboard and melodic , to-the-point soloing . His improvisation on `` Donna Lee '' was a showcase of agility and ideas . On the downside , the pianist delivered much the same between-tune chatter ( `` Delighted to see you , '' is the blind musician 's standard greeting to an audience ) that he used during his Performing Arts Center appearance last year , even stooping to tell the same jokes . One would hope that this tired patter might reflect something new the next time he comes to town , or be dropped altogether . Williams , backed by Shearing , Swainson and drummer Clayton Cameron , put his bouncy , brassy voice to blues and standards such as `` Just Friends '' and Ellington 's `` I Let a Song Go Out of My Heart . '' Despite his reputation as a blues singer , Williams ' was most satisfying while performing ballads , which he delivered with warmth and conviction . His reading of Thad Jones ' `` A Child Is Born '' was particularly moving , accented by Shearing 's hushed , minor-key lullaby that closed the tune . Pass ' inclusion on the last few numbers almost seemed an afterthought . Nearly inaudible when providing accompaniment , the guitarist stepped out for short , slippery improvs before disappearing back into the mix . The three men closed with a tune from Williams ' Basie days , `` The Comeback , '' which the singer dedicated to those serving overseas . Pass , Shearing and Williams will appear Sunday at UCLA 's Royce Hall .