The new mother studied the petal-pink baby sleeping beside her . `` I call him my little miracle baby , '' Pam Baird said as she gazed at 8-week-old Nathan . Miracle indeed . Baird learned she had breast cancer not long after she learned she was pregnant . A nationally known oncologist urged an immediate abortion , then chemotherapy , as her best chance to survive . But after consulting more than a dozen specialists and a hospital ethics committee , Baird , like a growing number of pregnant women with cancer , decided to try to beat the disease -- and keep her baby . After a mastectomy , she began an aggressive course of chemotherapy . Every few weeks for most of her pregnancy , Baird reported to the Breast Care Center in Orange for injections of three anti-cancer drugs . Sometimes the powerful toxins made her vomit . Sometimes her blond curls fell out in handfuls . And sometimes -- scared for her baby and whether she would live to raise him -- all she could do was cry . But once a month , at the obstetrician 's office , Baird was reassured by a black-and-white ultrasound image that showed a normal baby curled tightly inside her . In August , about five weeks early , Baird , 35 , delivered a healthy , 5-pound , 4-ounce boy . And this week , after finishing her last chemotherapy treatment , she and her husband , Rodger , celebrated with champagne . Baird 's cancer is in remission , her current oncologist , David Margileth said , adding : `` Here 's a breast cancer patient I feel optimistic about . . . . Here 's a woman I think will be around to raise her baby . '' Cancer is rare in pregnancy . A spokeswoman from the National Cancer Institute estimated that a malignancy occurs once in a thousand pregnancies . Breast cancer occurs once in every 3,500 pregnancies . ( Cancer occurs in 36 out of 1,000 people in the general population . ) But when it does occur , it raises deep emotional and ethical questions for patients and their doctors . Should the mother-to-be have an abortion ? Can she afford to delay cancer treatment until her baby is mature enough for delivery ? Will the baby be harmed by chemotherapy ? And will the mother live to care for her child ? Twenty years ago , obstetricians and oncologists say , the standard recommendation when breast cancer occurred during pregnancy was an immediate abortion followed by mastectomy , radiation or chemotherapy . `` In the past , an abortion had been recommended because the physician was uncomfortable about doing the treatments necessary for the mother for fear of injuring the fetus , '' said Dr. Frankie Ann Holmes , an assistant professor of medical oncology at M.D . Anderson Cancer Center in Houston . Today , some doctors still advocate abortion , but many others , including Holmes , are convinced that `` you do n't have to terminate . '' Radiation therapy is still considered harmful to the baby during all stages of pregnancy , and diagnostic abdominal X-rays have been associated with a high risk of leukemia after birth and other malignancies , some doctors report . But chemotherapy is a different story . Anti-cancer drugs can harm a baby during the first trimester when the heart , lungs and other organs are developing , medical articles have reported . But many of the same drugs can be used safely in the second and third trimester , Holmes , other oncologists and obstetricians have reported . At the Houston center , for instance , four breast cancer patients who had chemotherapy during pregnancy gave birth to normal babies this year , Holmes said . Still , some doctors admit they are uncomfortable when it comes to treating a pregnant woman for cancer . `` Everybody kind of wrings their hands a little bit , '' said Dr. Robert Dillman , director of the Hoag Cancer Center in Newport Beach . `` You really would like to get the fetus out . '' Margileth said that as Baird 's pregnancy continued during the chemotherapy , `` I tossed and turned about this . . . . Are we doing the right thing ? '' Margileth said he was also concerned that the normally happy experience of pregnancy had become a troubling one because of the cancer . `` Here 's this nice , 3-to-4-month pregnant person that you just wish was shopping at South Coast Plaza for maternity clothes -- rather than getting adriamcyin ( a chemotherapy agent ) , '' Margileth said . Another concern : There is little data showing the long-term effects of chemotherapy on the child . Doctors say they simply do n't know if the children will develop major problems later , such as infertility or leukemia . `` We worry , '' said Dr. Gerald Gilchrist , chairman of pediatrics at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester , Minn. , and of the American Academy of Pediatric 's section on hematology and oncology . He added : `` I do n't think anyone knows . '' Baird noticed a lump in her right breast late last January , shortly after she had weaned her first son , Rory , now 17 months . Not long after that , a home pregnancy test and then a visit to Orange obstetrician Peter Anzaldo confirmed she was pregnant . Anzaldo suggested that the breast lump might be caused by a clogged milk duct , Baird said , but sent her to the Breast Center for a more detailed exam . A biopsy revealed a large , cancerous tumor . And in March , as Baird entered her second trimester , she had a mastectomy . That surgery showed her cancer had spread , invading one lymph node . Thus , the debate began in earnest . Should Baird abort ? Should she continue her pregnancy and have chemotherapy ? Baird was n't sure what to do . `` I had a 10-month-old son . I did n't want to die of breast cancer and leave him without a mother . . . . But I did n't want to have an abortion . '' Margileth began researching the issue , reading journal articles and contacting experts around the country . When his first contact , a renowned breast cancer specialist , emphatically recommended abortion , Baird spent a sleepless week in tears . But Margileth continued his inquiries , finding many oncologists who thought Baird could continue her pregnancy and start chemotherapy in the second trimester . Meanwhile , Baird 's family and friends did their own research . Her brother , a medical student , sent copies of the few nationally reported studies on cancer in pregnancy . A friend , an oncology nurse , talked to experts at the National Institutes of Health . Her mother , who was also being treated for breast cancer , talked to doctors . And her husband , Rodger , an environmental chemist , asked the National Cancer Institute for a list of reports on pregnant women with cancer , then wrote to their authors asking how the babies had fared . The three doctors who responded offered good news : The babies were normal . Exulted Korean obstetrician Doo Sang Kim : `` The bottom line is , 'The baby is now 4 years and 5 months old and very healthy ! ' `` Dr. Thomas G. Day Jr. , director of gynecologic oncology at the James Graham Brown Cancer Center in Louisville , Ky , wrote : `` I would like to reassure you that if chemotherapy is started after 12 to 14 weeks , it is probably safe . '' The Bairds took one more step . At Anzaldo 's suggestion , they asked St. Joseph Health System 's perinatal bioethics committee to review their case . A 25-member committee that included doctors , a geneticist , a social worker and a priest listened as Anzaldo presented diverse opinions on what to do . The committee provided a forum for the issues , but no recommendation . Still , Rodger Baird called the meeting `` cathartic . They did n't have any lectures for us . I spent half the time asking technical questions of the geneticist . '' But when it ended , the Bairds had come to a conclusion . Three days later , in her 15th week of pregnancy , Pam Baird received her first dose of chemotherapy . `` The first time I had it , I just cried , '' she recalled . `` It was scary '' to know she was pregnant and yet three powerful , toxic drugs -- Adriamycin , Cytoxan and an agent called 5 Fu -- were coursing through her veins . Although she became nauseated and her hair fell out , the treatments never seemed to affect the baby , Baird said . Each month , `` I just relied on Dr. Anzaldo that everything was all right . At each visit , he took a sonogram and I could see the baby move . '' Nathan Trilling Baird was born prematurely , by Cesarean section , after Baird 's amniotic fluid began leaking in the eighth month of her pregnancy . Anzaldo does not believe the anti-cancer drugs caused the premature birth or affected the baby . The Bairds are thankful -- and still a little amazed -- that chemotherapy did n't hurt their son . `` These are really nasty compounds , '' Rodger Baird said . `` But the baby 's definitely healthy . '' As for Pam Baird , she is busy caring for cuddly Nathan as well as trying to keep track of Rory , an active toddler . And she has some suggestions for other women who might find themselves pregnant and diagnosed with cancer . `` Do n't just rely on one doctor , '' she advised . `` Take the initiative to research it . Do n't just go on blind faith . '' The Bairds recently wrote to the three cancer specialists they had heard from , thanking them for their responses and reporting that mother and baby were fine . And Pam Baird said she was considering sending one more letter -- and a picture of Nathan -- to the prominent breast cancer specialist who had urged an abortion . The note will be brief , Baird said : `` This is the baby we would n't have had . ''