An old territorial dispute over a tiny cluster of uninhabited islands was reignited last month , threatening to upset Japan 's delicate balance of friendship with neighbors Taiwan and China -- and revealing how raw Asian sensitivities still are over the legacy of Japanese militarism . THE ISSUE -- In dispute is a group of five islets and three coral reefs in the East China Sea about 130 miles northeast of Taiwan and 100 miles north-northwest of Ishigaki Island in Japan 's Okinawa prefecture . Lying 220 miles to the west is the Chinese mainland . The Senkaku Islands , as they are called in Japanese , had of late attracted scant attention until early October . That was when the Maritime Safety Agency , Japan 's version of the coast guard , disclosed that it was ready to grant official status to a private lighthouse erected on one of those forlorn rocks by an obscure Japanese right-wing organization . No further provocation was needed for an opposition politician in Taiwan to lead a landing party to the islands , called Diaoyutai in Chinese , with the intention of reasserting Taiwanese sovereignty by having athletes from a sports festival walk ashore with a torch . A television crew from Taipei recorded the scene Oct. 21 from a helicopter as Japanese Maritime Safety Agency ships chased away the two Taiwanese fishing boats . REACTION -- The incident sparked official complaints of `` intrusion '' from Tokyo and accusations of `` unfriendly harassment '' and `` military expansionism '' from Taipei . Protesters threw rotten eggs and burned a Japanese flag outside Tokyo 's unofficial representative office in the Taiwanese capital . Similar demonstrations occurred in Hong Kong . Authorities in Beijing have been comparatively calm during the whole affair , but they reiterated China 's territorial claim to the islets . Beijing Radio carried a report last weekend saying China proposed jointly developing the islands with Japan and Taiwan.Tokyo reacted coolly . The timing of the dispute could not have been worse for Tokyo , which is attempting to get legislation through Parliament that would permit personnel of the Japanese Self-Defense Forces to join peacekeeping efforts in the Persian Gulf . The bill has aroused fears of revanchism among Asian countries that fell victim to past Japanese expansionism . AT STAKE -- At the same time , Japan 's borders are not things taken lightly at home . A territorial dispute over four small islands off Hokkaido has been the major block to friendly relations with Moscow since the end of World War II . The battle for the Senkakus pivots on national pride , but also at stake are rich fishing grounds and potential deep-sea oil deposits . HISTORY -- Japan first annexed the islands after it acquired Taiwan as a colony in 1895 at the end of the Sino-Japanese War . In 1972 , when they established diplomatic ties , China and Japan disagreed on sovereignty but agreed to shelve the problem for `` future generations to solve . '' In 1978 , a right-wing group called the Nihon Seinensha flaunted Japan 's claim of sovereignty by building a lighthouse on the largest of the islets . After repairs were made to the lighthouse in 1988 and 1989 , it won recognition as an official navigational facility . OUTLOOK -- What will happen next on the Senkaku Islands is not clear . A second Taiwanese opposition politician has vowed to sail back to the disputed islands with a flotilla of 300 fishing boats . The Taiwanese military has declined to become involved , and Tokyo , too , has said it wo n't use naval forces to patrol the area -- only ships from the civilian Maritime Safety Agency .