Dry , gusty air , lots of sunshine and a few wispy clouds are on the horizon for San Diegans this weekend , according to the National Weather Service . The Santa Ana winds are gradually going away but will gather strength for one last blow Saturday , forecaster Wilbur Shigehara said . `` Winds will be light and gentle today , but the gusty Santa Ana winds will return on Saturday before fading away on Sunday , '' Shigehara said . In the mountains , the Santa Anas may reach 20 to 40 m.p.h . and may also surface in the coastal valleys and canyons , he said . Temperatures will be mild during the day and chilly at night , he said . `` We 're getting reports of frost in Escondido , but it is not serious for agricultural growers . '' Beach temperatures may hit a high of 68 degrees today and range from 66 to 70 on Saturday before falling 1 or 2 degrees on Sunday . The ocean temperature will be 61 degrees , with waves reaching 2 to 3 feet at 12-second intervals . High tides for the month are predicted on Dec. 12 at 7.7 feet . Coastal temperatures will range from 68 to 74 today and rise to about 78 Saturday before falling 2 to 3 degrees Sunday . Night temperatures over the weekend are expected to dip into the 40s . Inland residents will experience highs in the 73- to 78-degree range today , with temperatures rising to a high of 82 on Saturday before falling slightly Sunday . Nights will bring light frost and temperatures in the 34- to 44-degree range . `` The coldest temperature in the agricultural areas should bottom out at 30 degrees , but it will be nothing serious , '' Shigehara said . In the mountains , today 's high will be 46 to 54 , dropping a couple of degrees over the weekend . Night temperatures will be 25 to 35 degrees , he said . In the deserts , the temperature will range from 68 to 75 today and go up over the weekend a few degrees . Overnight lows will range from 35 to 45 . Shigehara predicted mild temperatures and little rainfall for the month . `` December does n't look like too radical a change from November , '' he said . `` December looks like an extension of what 's been happening , with highs of about 66 during the day and 48 at night . '' A more dramatic change in the weather will come in January , normally the wettest month in the year with about 2.11 inches of rainfall , Shigehara said .