In hot weather you want to flop on the couch and not move . Mitsubishi Electric has an air conditioner with a remote control that lets you cool down without getting up . Part of the Mr . Slim series of wall-mounted and ductless cooling units , the wireless remote lets you change the temperature and air direction as easily as flipping a TV channel . The remote controller , called the `` I Feel Control '' feature , uses a microprocessor and LCD readout to indicate the mode you are in . For example , if you just came in from work and want to quickly cool a room , put the fan speed on high . If you want the room at 70 degrees , you can program it and the unit will remember the setting from day to day . You can also tell the system to kick on before you come home , and the room will be cool when you get there . `` The air conditioner itself has a heat pump system that can also be used for warming a room in the winter , '' says Richard Trethewey , the plumber on `` This Old House '' on PBS and an air-conditioning contractor in Boston . `` Instead of burning gas or oil , the Mitsubishi draws heat energy from the surrounding air . '' The Mr . Slim is priced steeply -- from $ 2,500 to $ 3,000 installed for 9,000 to 14,500 BTUs , and you need a professional air-conditioning contractor to do the work . Energy efficiency ratings for the line are excellent , ranging from 9.0 to 10.6 . Panasonic 's new L-shaped air conditioners look unusual . But their special shape makes them quieter , and they use less window space . The compressor and other main components hang outside and below the window . Its cross-flow fan directs cool air inside while the roar of the motor stays outside . `` Compared to standard air conditioners , the front panels of these L-shaped models are about 6 inches high , eliminating blocked views and blocked sunlight , '' says Ian Brydon , national marketing manager of Panasonic 's home appliance division . Standard units of comparable BTUs ( 6,000 to 8,000 ) are about 11 inches high . Ideal for an upstairs room or a bedroom , the L-shaped Panasonics cost $ 475 to $ 600 , depending on the model . The energy efficiency rating is 9.1 . Distributed by AP Newsfeatures .