Paint companies scrambled to alleviate consumer fears Friday over reports that mercury in interior latex paint can be harmful . Several of the companies said they have not used mercury for years . The Environmental Protection Agency barred manufacturers from adding mercury to paint after Aug. 20 . Paint made before then may still be sold , however . But the furor followed reports this week of a study that found relatively high levels of mercury in people whose homes were painted inside with latex paint containing mercury . The study , conducted in 1989 , was published in Thursday 's issue of the New England Journal of Medicine . Concern about mercury in paint arose last year after a 4-year-old Michigan boy suffered mercury poisoning when his home was painted . He suffered severe rashes , itching , sweating and a personality change . The EPA 's 24-hour hot line for paint information -- the National Pesticide Telecommunications Network at 1-800-858-7378 -- reported a record 900 calls on the issue on Thursday . A trade group for 550 manufacturers , including some of the nation 's largest , noted that paint used in the study and to which the boy was exposed contained nearly three times as much mercury as the EPA recommended at the time . The paint was made by the Mercury Paint Co. of Detroit , Mich. '' It was almost certainly at the high end , '' said Marilyn Ludwig , spokeswoman for the National Paint & Coatings Assn . in Washington . `` Vague directives '' led the EPA to declare Mercury Paint 's mercury levels to be an `` unenforceable action , '' agency spokesman Al Heier said . A telephone call Friday to Charles Soberman , president and owner of Mercury Paint , was not returned . Most uses of mercury were banned in the mid-1970s , except in paint . Manufacturers had convinced the EPA that they did n't have a good alternative to mercury , Heier said . The element is used to preserve the paint in the can and prevent mildew after application . The EPA estimates that , before the recent ban , up to 30 % of interior latex paint contained mercury . But the industry association believes just 10 % to 15 % contained the element , Ludwig said . Consumers who own paint bought before the ban should call the manufacturer to determine if it contains mercury , she said .