As 150 elderly persons loudly protested outside , Assemblyman Dan Hauser conducted hearings in Los Angeles on Thursday into local rent control laws that he claims drive away badly needed apartment development in California . But a parade of officials from West Hollywood , Santa Monica , Berkeley and Los Angeles instead urged Hauser to turn his critical eye to cities without rent control , claiming that California 's rent-control cities are leaders in the building and rehabilitating of low-income housing . Hauser 's aide , Stephen Holloway , said the premise of the hearing was `` that the more stringent the rent control , the less affordable housing is built . '' Hauser ( D-Arcata ) , chairman of the Assembly Committee on Housing and Community Development , has authored a bill to allow the state to intervene in rent-control laws . Hauser 's featured speaker , Anthony Downs , a rent-control foe and free market advocate from the Brookings Institution , said regulations such as rent control and downzoning are `` a central cause of high housing prices and rents in California . '' Downs singled out cities with strict rent controls , such as West Hollywood and Santa Monica , but was challenged by officials of those cities to compare their housing records with areas where no rent controls exist . `` What you should focus on is the lack of affordable housing in non-rent control cities , '' West Hollywood Councilman John Heilman said . `` What you 'll find is that . . . their shortages of affordable housing and housing problems are far worse . '' In a testy exchange with state Assemblyman Tom Hayden ( D-West Los Angeles ) , Downs claimed that housing construction in Santa Monica has fallen dramatically since the adoption of rent control 10 years ago , a situation that he said will drive up rents in the long run . Demanding that Downs produce proof , Hayden responded , `` Santa Monica in fact creates a higher percentage , per capita , of affordable housing than any city in the state . . . . It 's the envy of the state . . . . There 's no evidence after 10 years ( under rent control ) that your ideology is correct . '' The hearing was described by several city officials as the launching of a statewide effort by landlord groups to wrest control from cities and allow the state to decide when rent control is proper . Hauser , a rural legislator known for his timber and outdoor expertise , does not represent any cities with urban housing problems . He has proposed a bill that would allow the state to alter or abolish strict rent controls in cities if the state determines that the laws hurt housing development . `` Hauser knows cows , not tenants , '' said Larry Gross , a longtime West Hollywood rent-control activist . `` Why is he crusading against cities who are going out of their way to attack the housing crisis , and why is he bringing in a rent-control foe like Tony Downs ? '' Outside , a throng of mostly elderly protesters carried an effigy of an affordable home sitting in a coffin and chanted , `` Hey , hey , ho , ho , Dan Hauser 's got to go ! '' One man carried a sign reading , `` Do n't Make Grandpas Homeless , '' while another said , `` More Housing , Less Hauser . '' Hauser insisted , however , that he was not fighting rent control but was instead trying to boost housing construction in cities where controls might dampen developer enthusiasm . He said he is concerned about laws in a handful of cities that prevent landlords from raising rents on vacant units . ( By contrast , in Los Angeles rents are protected only until a unit is vacated , at which time the landlord can raise it to any level he chooses . Known as `` vacancy decontrol , '' it has allowed rents here to escalate 110 % since 1980 while providing some protection to renters as long as they do not move , city officials said . ) In a 1988 study , Downs found that mild rent controls such as Los Angeles ' do not hurt development . But he contends that cities that prevent landlords from boosting rents on empty units are wrongly keeping rents from rising to whatever the market will bear . Removing controls from a choicely located but still solidly middle-class city such as Santa Monica `` may eventually exclude almost all low-income and moderate-income households and permit only wealthy residents to live there , '' Downs wrote in his study . `` But that is an inherent and essential aspect of the free market system . '' Despite many studies on the rent-control issue , there is little clear-cut evidence that rent control is the underlying cause of downturns in housing development . Studies show that apartment development is more directly hampered by regional economic downturns , restrictive land-use laws and downzoning , the removal of federal tax incentives for investors , speculation that drives up residential land costs in boom areas , volatile interest rates and the shunning of poor areas by lenders . Seattle , which has no rent control , suffered a 24 % decline in apartment construction in the 1980s , according to Downs ' study . Meanwhile , Los Angeles , with rent control , enjoyed a 14.7 % surge in such construction in the 1980s . It bettered San Diego , which has no rent control and whose apartment construction increased 14.3 % . Driven in large part by the West Coast land boom , rents in both Los Angeles and San Diego have skyrocketed in the 1980s , according to the Joint Center for Housing Studies at Harvard . The center found that , regardless of whether rent controls exist , rents in California have far outstripped inflation or minor increases in local family earnings . San Diego , California 's largest city without rent control , is the most expensive city in the nation with a median rent of $ 628 , the center said . Economists often argue that removing rent controls could increase the supply of housing and lower rental prices in the long run . But urban planners and sociologists often counter that low-income housing was abandoned by the free market years before rent controls were adopted in the late 1970s and early 1980s . In fact , low-income housing in California is built largely through government subsidies and intervention . Moreover , according to a study on rental housing by Richard Appelbaum , chairman of the department of sociology at UC Santa Barbara , landlords `` do not behave competitively '' by lowering rents on long-vacant apartments as would be expected under natural laws of supply and demand . He found that landlords will not lower rents until vacancy rates in a region climb to 8 % or 10 % -- a rare condition that has not existed in most urban areas for many years . HOUSING TRACK RECORDS Figures below show the number of low-income housing units built or rehabilitated since 1986 by California cities with rent controls compared to the amount of low-income housing developed by cities without rent controls during the same period . POPULATION MEDIAN INCOME NEW UNITS RENT CONTROL Los Angeles 3,400,000 $ 15,746 15,500 San Francisco 741,300 $ 15,864 3,600 Berkeley 106,800 $ 13,506 315 Santa Monica 97,200 $ 16,604 286 West Hollywood 38,400 $ 19,000 243 NO RENT CONTROL San Diego 1,060,000 $ 16,409 258 Glendale 161,900 $ 17,205 0 Pasadena 132,000 $ 16,298 72 Redondo Beach 56,075 $ 21,879 20 Manhattan Beach 35,300 $ 29,404 0 Source : City departments of housing or community redevelopment