The Taj Mahal city of Agra has become a virtual ghost town after at least 11 people were killed there in the Hindu-Muslim violence gripping India . More than 300 people have died across the nation since Dec. 7 in violence sparked by a dispute over a shrine in Ayodhya in the northern state of Uttar Pradesh . Officials describe the violence as among the worst since India gained independence 43 years ago . In Agra , also in Uttar Pradesh , police spokesman M. P. Solanki said Monday that at least 11 people have been killed and 28 injured in Hindu-Muslim clashes since Friday . Soldiers , paramilitary units and police patrolled the streets and stood guard around the Taj Mahal , closed since the fighting broke out . The soldiers turned back two Australian tourists who tried to enter the grounds of the sparkling marble masterpiece of 17th-Century Muslim architecture . The huge wooden gates were shut , and an official said it was too dangerous to allow anyone inside the Taj Mahal , built by the Muslim ruler Shah Jehan in memory of his wife . The official appeared to be referring to fears that Hindu extremists might make a target of the Taj Mahal , one of the few popular destinations left for tourists visiting India . An indefinite curfew and heavy security kept most people off Agra 's streets , and nearly every shop was boarded up . The Hindu militants are campaigning to claim the Ayodhya site as the birthplace of the Hindu god-king Lord Rama . They say Muslim invaders razed a temple on Lord Rama 's birthplace in 1528 to build a monument to the Islamic conquest of India . In New Delhi , Prime Minister Chandra Shekhar said that he is prepared to use `` any amount of force needed '' if dialogue fails to halt the Hindu-Muslim riots . `` Certain people are trying to create trouble . They are exploiting this thing , '' he said in an interview with Associated Press . The sectarian violence helped bring down his predecessor , Prime Minister V. P. Singh , about a month ago . Parliament then gave Shekhar a vote of confidence to form a new government . He said Monday that he is optimistic that dialogue can defuse the sectarian rivalries and fears that have spurred Hindus and Muslims to murderous riots in several cities . Mobs have slaughtered infants with axes , burned people alive and lynched passengers on passing trains . `` It is very difficult to grapple with the situation , '' Shekhar said , adding : `` We want to deal with the situation with restraint and patience . '' Shekhar , a veteran politician , tends to speak in political platitudes in public . But he has a reputation for tough-minded effectiveness when it comes to wheeling and dealing in private with his friends and foes . Shekhar said his willingness to make political deals and engage in dialogue should not be interpreted as a sign of weakness . On Friday , he said he soon will present a new peace plan for Punjab , where Sikh extremists have killed more than 3,100 people this year , the highest annual toll since they launched their separatist campaign in 1982 .