QUESTION : We rent a duplex in Westchester , and Los Angeles ' rent control applies . Our month-to-month rental agreement says the tenancy may be terminated by either party with 30 days notice . `` No relocation fees are applicable '' was written in by our landlord . Nearby duplexes are being rapidly demolished and replaced by new apartments . It appears to be only a matter of time before our duplex goes . The question is , is a clause like this enforceable even though it appears to be contrary to the city rent control law , which says my family , which includes a minor child , is entitled to a $ 5,000 relocation fee ? ANSWER : The clause is not enforceable because , as you said , it conflicts with the city 's rent law . If your owner decides to demolish and asks you to leave the premises , you are entitled to the relocation money . Similarly , any renter in Los Angeles who is asked to move or evicted through a `` no-fault '' eviction in which the renter is not at fault ( does nothing wrong ) , is entitled to relocation fees . No-fault evictions include the following : The owner wants to move in his parents , children , himself or his spouse ; to demolish the property , or when an owner seeks to permanently remove a rental unit from rental housing use . Relocation fees are paid at the rate of $ 5,000 a unit to the elderly , handicapped or families with minor children . Others get $ 2,000 . Rental Owner Must Provide 'Safe ' Carpet Q : The carpet in my Los Angeles apartment is badly worn . It was used four years ago when I moved in , and the owner wo n't replace it until I move out or a premium is added to the rent . Although the unit is rent controlled , should n't I expect minor maintenance such as this for wear and tear ? A : Carpeting , like anything in a rental , must be maintained in a safe condition . While it may be worn , it may still be `` safe . '' If it is , the owner is not obligated to replace or repair it . If the carpet is unsafe , for instance , has holes in it , which could cause you to trip and fall , the owner must do something about it . He does not , however , have to replace the carpet . He may repair it . And that would be `` minor maintenance . '' If the owner opts to replace the carpet , he is entitled to a rent increase under L.A. 's rent law for that `` capital improvement , '' which is what replacement is considered under the law . Landlord Can Take Action on Damages Q : The renter has moved out of my Los Angeles apartment . It was clean when he moved in but it 's not clean now . The tenant also left holes in the walls of all of the rooms , with an extra big one in the living room ceiling . I also just recently paid a $ 79.98 plumbing bill that the plumber said was caused by a grease stoppage . And , finally , he broke the locks on our gate and broke into our garage . The question is , what can I do now ? Do I deduct money from the security deposit or sue in Small Claims Court ? A : You may deduct money from the deposit for the actual cost of the cleaning and to repair damages that are over and above `` normal wear and tear . '' Holes in the walls resulting from renters hanging pictures and the like are usually considered normal wear and tear by the courts . The `` big '' one in the living room you allude to probably is not . Since you say it was the plumber , as an independent `` expert , '' who ascertained that the drain stoppage resulted from grease , you should be safe in deducting the charge to unclog the drain . The broken gate lock and the garage break-in and any damages related to it , are not , obviously , considered normal wear and tear . However , unless the renter admitted breaking the lock or breaking into the garage , you would be hard-pressed to prove in Small Claims Court that he is culpable . You may sue this renter in Small Claims Court for any damages that exceed his security deposit , from which you may deduct money for the cleaning , damages and unpaid rent , if there was any . Tenant Without Bank Account Prefers Cash Q : I live in Arroyo Grande , near San Luis Obispo , and I have a problem . My lease says I must pay my rent by check or money order . I do n't have a bank account , and getting money orders is very inconvenient and costly . Here 's my question : Can I be evicted because I prefer to pay the rent in cash ? A : Absent an agreement to the contrary , an owner may demand to be paid his rent in cash if he gives a renter some extra time to get it . There is no rule/law that says you can not enter into an agreement , as you say you have done , to pay the rent in a form other than cash . I 'd keep paying the rent by money order . Landlady Wants to Rent Month-to-Month Q : My husband and I moved into our one-bedroom Glendora apartment about a year ago . We signed a one-year lease . Now our landlady wants to turn our lease into a month-to-month rental agreement . She says that if we do n't sign the new agreement , she will evict us . Can she do that ? If we sign the agreement , is there a chance that she could still evict us ? She just raised the rent by $ 25 a month , and we 're afraid that she 'll continue to do so with this new month-to-month arrangement and no rent control in the city . A : The landlady can require you to move out with a 30-day notice at any time now that the lease has expired . She does n't need a reason in Glendora , such as , `` they did n't sign the new agreement , '' to do so . Do n't be overly concerned with the $ 25 rent increase as annual rent increases are fairly common within the industry . If your landlady really wanted you to move out , she probably would not have offered you a month-to-month rental agreement . Postema is editor of Apartment Age Magazine , a publication of the Apartment Assn . of Greater Los Angeles , an apartment owners ' service group . Mail your questions on any aspect of apartment living to `` Rentformation , '' Apartment Assn . of Greater Los Angeles , 621 S. Westmoreland Ave. , Los Angeles , Calif. 90005-3995 .