The roof is rotted , the smashed windows have been boarded up and the railings of its creaky walkway are badly rusted . Scrub oak , buckthorn and pine grow amid a jumble of boulders , and red-tailed hawks soar overhead . In its present condition , it is hard to imagine that the lookout cabin once played an important part in safeguarding Angeles National Forest against fires . But it is precisely that importance that has earned a new lease on life for the weather-worn cabin perched on a craggy outcrop of Mt . Vetter , nearly 6,000 feet above a fork of Big Tujunga Canyon . The 13- by 13-foot `` ground cab , '' as U. S. Forest Service archeologist Mike McIntyre calls it , was the last in a line of 22 lookouts that have come and gone since the first one was built in 1927 . It was retired as a fire lookout a decade ago and since then has fallen on hard times . But thanks to surplus timber sales by national forests in Northern California last year , the Forest Service has acquired funds to launch a $ 16,000 project that will give two of three surviving lookouts a face lift and preserve them as historic displays . `` When you think of the Forest Service , you think of Smokey the Bear and the ranger in the lookout watching for fires , '' said McIntyre , who spearheaded the restoration drive . `` We want to turn this into an interpretive exhibit . '' Aiding in the restoration effort will be the Big Santa Anita Historical Society in Arcadia . It pledged $ 5,000 toward refurnishing the bare lookout cabins at Vetter , 10 miles north of Arcadia , and at South Mt . Hawkins , 12 miles east of Vetter . A third cabin , built in the 1960s , did not fare so well and will not be restored : It rests unused on a steel tower at Mt . Slide , overlooking Pyramid Lake . Forest Service personnel and volunteers will begin patching up the cabins in coming months . It costs too much to bring a carpenter in to do the job , McIntyre said . Glen Owens , president of the historical society , said many of the old forest lodges and mountain taverns have been destroyed or allowed to decay . `` There 's not a whole lot of history left in the forest structurally , '' Owens said . Both lookouts under restoration are eligible for inclusion in the federal National Register of Historic Places . That means that every rotted plank removed must be replaced with the same type of wood . `` It adds to the cost , but it 's well worth it , '' said McIntyre , who is applying to have the cabins formally designated as historic . After the restoration is finished , McIntyre said he hopes to get volunteer groups to adopt the cabins to help with their maintenance , suggesting as possible helpers Boy Scout troops , firefighters organizations or environmental associations . The eventual goal is for volunteers to live in trailers at the cabin site , acting as security guards and providing visitors with historical information . The lookouts are part of the lore of firefighting 's past in Angeles National Forest . Before the advent of the cabins , park rangers would simply nail pieces of wood to a tree and climb up for a good perch , McIntyre said . Others would camp at a high point armed with a fire-finder , which resembles a large compass overlaying a map . When lookout cabins came into use , the person on watch would remain at the station for six or seven months during the fire season each year . In the early 1950s , the Forest Service had more than 5,000 manned fire lookouts nationwide . Today , fewer than 600 remain ; fewer than 100 are in California . In Angeles Forest , propane stoves were used for cooking , and water had to be hauled up in five-gallon cans . `` It 's a very solitary life , '' McIntyre said . Sandy De Lapp , a Forest Service accountant , lived alone atop a 30-foot-high wooden tower in the South Mt . Hawkins lookout cab from 1952 until it was closed in 1980 . `` Everybody thinks it 's so romantic . But it 's just a job , '' said De Lapp , conceding that she did enjoy the peace and quiet . Between fires , she read `` everything you could get your hands on , '' from Tolstoy to the history of World War II , she said . She put out a pan of water for the birds and deer and fed a skunk that almost became a pet . And she always remained watchful for the warning puffs of smoke . `` You automatically just looked all the time , '' said De Lapp , who has watched more fires start than she cares to count . She learned to stay alert for the lightning bolt that lingered for more than a second on a branch of a tree , `` especially if it had a red tip . '' `` Lookouts were critical at a time when there were n't many people in the forest , '' McIntyre said . At one time they reported about 70 % of the fires that started , but their importance faded as more people started using the forest recreationally . More roads penetrated the terrain , and rangers began to regularly patrol campgrounds . Twenty-four fire stations now serve the forest 's 693,000 acres . And because the forest is under the flight path to Ontario International Airport , even airline pilots began to call in reports of fires , said Gordon Rowley , Forest Service fire management specialist . If a blaze is sighted , `` the airline will call the tower , and the tower will call us , '' said Rowley , adding that by the time the lookouts were abandoned , they were reporting only 3 % of the fires . Even though they are now obsolete , Owens said , `` we have to understand what people used to do to appreciate what we have today . ''