The reported death rate from Alzheimer 's disease jumped tenfold between 1979 and 1987 , federal health officials said Thursday . While the number of people contracting the disease may be rising , the statistical increase more likely reflects the fact that physicians are more aware of Alzheimer 's and are diagnosing it more frequently , according to the Centers for Disease Control , which released the findings . Alzheimer 's disease is a progressive , irreversible neurological disorder of the elderly , marked by memory loss and severe disorientation . It currently afflicts an estimated 4 million Americans , according to the Alzheimer 's Assn . From 1979 through 1987 , Alzheimer 's was listed as the underlying cause of death for 46,202 Americans , the CDC reported . The death rate from the disease increased from 0.4 per 100,000 people in 1979 to 4.2 per 100,000 people in 1987 , it said . For men , the annual rate increased from 0.5 to 4.6 per 100,000 people , the CDC said . For women , the rate rose from 0.3 to 3.9 . In California , the number of reported deaths attributed to Alzheimer 's rose from 109 in 1979 to 1,052 in 1987 . The state 's death rate increased from 0.5 per 100,000 people in 1979 to 3.9 in 1987 . `` I think it 's true that the numbers of people may have increased over time , but it 's a little bit difficult to imagine that that would account for an almost tenfold increase , '' said Dr. Richard Sun , a medical epidemiologist with the CDC . `` If there had been a true increase in incidence , I think our nursing homes would be overrun . If anything , I think heightened awareness ( on the part of physicians ) is the stronger factor . '' Stephen McConnell , vice president for public policy of the Alzheimer 's Assn. , a Washington-based organization , agreed . `` Alzheimer 's has been woefully under-reported in the past , '' he said . `` We know a lot more about diagnosing the disease now than we did 10 years ago . Until recently , when a person contracted Alzheimer 's and declined , the thing that finally brought it to an end was pneumonia or something else . That 's what would appear on the death certificate -- and that 's what got reported . Now physicians are making sure that Alzheimer 's is on the death certificate . '' McConnell acknowledged , however , that the actual incidence of the disease could be rising as well . `` People are living longer , and the elderly is the population with the highest incidence ( of Alzheimer 's ) , '' he said . `` So there will be more people dying of it . '' He added : `` Whatever the statistics , we still think it is under-reported . '' The CDC 's Sun said he believes `` there are a lot of unknowns here , '' and that `` further investigation is needed to help clarify what is going on . '' He said the CDC plans to begin a study in collaboration with the Wesley Woods Geriatric Hospital in Atlanta `` to resolve some of the issues . '' The study will look at patients who had been hospitalized and who died -- either during or after hospitalization -- to determine what percentage had Alzheimer 's and what percentage of those patients had Alzheimer 's listed as the official cause of death . Likewise , the study will attempt to determine what percentage of patients might have had Alzheimer 's incorrectly listed on their death certificates as the cause of death . `` Over time , '' Sun said , `` we 'll see if more people had it written on their death certificates in the true sense or mistakenly . '' The study could help reveal whether there is a heightened awareness among physicians , Sun said . `` But it wo n't answer the question of whether Alzheimer 's has actually increased in the population , '' he added .