Forget workout fatigue , that tired but smug after-exercise glow . These days , you can get tired just awaiting a turn at your health club 's stair-climbing machine . Long lines to use these exercise machines are typical but understandable . In as little as 20 minutes , you can improve both heart health and muscle tone . But there is a time limit on how long you can use the machines imposed at some gyms . Now comes the boom in home stair-climbing machines . A dozen or so manufacturers are offering versions for home use , some selling for less than $ 100 and others with price tags of $ 3,000 or more . But does higher cost mean better quality ? And how can consumers separate frill features from necessities ? There are no hard-and-fast rules about how much to spend . But do n't buy too low , advised Dr. Bob Goldman , an osteopathic physician who directs the nonprofit High Technology Fitness Research Institute in Chicago . He has evaluated numerous climbing machines designed for health club and home use . `` If you spend less than $ 400 on a home stair-climbing unit , you will end up with a unit that wo n't last very long , '' said Goldman . But others say that minimum is too low ; some advise consumers to invest at least $ 2,000 . Whatever the cost , stability is one of the most important features for such machines , experts agree . `` When you stand on the machine , '' Goldman said , `` be sure it is stable before you buy . '' `` Look for a machine that allows a natural stair-climbing posture , '' added Michael Hoffman , spokesman for Life Fitness Inc. , a stair-climbing machine manufacturer . `` Look for feedback features , '' said Goldman . Some machines , for example , can compute your actual effort versus your goal effort . Computer displays can also tell users the number of flights climbed , the duration of exercise and the total calories expended . ( But calorie expenditure should n't be taken as gospel , Goldman said , noting that the figures are based on norms . ) The most popular feedback features among exercisers are computations of calories expended , floors climbed or miles walked , said Rich Hansen , spokesman for the StairMaster climbing machine . Once you 've found your dream machine , plan to use it at least 20 minutes three times a week , Goldman said . Maintaining good form is vital to achieve the best results , Goldman said . `` Do n't lean too far forward . Keep your body in a natural stair climbing mode . '' Done properly , stair-climbing is a good , overall workout , Goldman said . `` It 's a good way to burn calories as well as tone the lower body , especially the hamstrings ( back of thigh muscles ) and buttocks . '' How you step depends on your goal , Goldman added . `` Shorter , rapid steps are safer . But long , slow steps train more muscles . You should see the effects of muscle building in three or four weeks . ''