Either Texas A & M or Texas will oppose the Western Athletic Conference champion in the Holiday Bowl Dec. 29 at San Diego Jack Murphy Stadium , sources close to the Holiday Bowl and Southwest Conference said Sunday . The most likely scenario has Texas A & M ( 6-2-1 ) in the Holiday Bowl because No . 14 Texas ( 7-1 ) is in the driver 's seat in the SWC race and will likely earn the conference 's automatic bid to the Cotton Bowl -- probably to face Miami , Fla. That would put the Aggies in the Holiday Bowl against the WAC champion , which almost certainly will be No . 8 Brigham Young ( 8-1 ) . `` If you ca n't spend New Year 's Eve in Dallas ( at the Cotton Bowl ) , I do n't think there 's a better place to spend the latter part of December than in San Diego , '' said John David Crow , athletic director at Texas A & M . There is an outside chance of Baylor ( 5-3-1 ) winning the conference title , but Holiday Bowl officials and the schools have made a deal to take either Texas A & M or Texas . Should Baylor win the conference title , a source close to the Holiday Bowl said the bowl officials would have the option to choose either Texas or Texas A & M , and they would most likely pick the winner of the Texas A & M-Texas game , Dec. 1 in Austin . Bowl bids can not be officially extended until Nov. 24 , according to the NCAA , but because four Pacific 10 Conference schools unofficially committed to games last week , bowl officials and teams spent the weekend scurrying to arrange holiday dates . `` As an option , we are very intrigued by ( the SWC ) , '' said John Reid , executive director of the Holiday Bowl . `` It would seem to be an exciting move for us , bringing a new flavor and a new look to the game . It would broaden our base even further . We 've had Southwest Conference teams , but never either of these two . '' Southern Methodist , which lost to BYU in the 1980 Holiday Bowl , and Arkansas , which defeated Arizona State in 1985 , are the only SWC teams to have played in the Holiday Bowl . Texas A & M , which lost to Pittsburgh , 31-28 , in last year 's John Hancock Bowl , was a preseason pick to win the SWC because of its offensive backfield and linebackers . Tailback Darren Lewis ( 149 yards a game ) is second in the nation in rushing , but the Aggies were upset , 17-8 , earlier this season at Louisiana State and they lost to Houston , 36-31 . They tied Baylor , 20-20 , leaving them with slim hopes for the Cotton Bowl . Although Texas A & M has never played in a Holiday Bowl , Crow and Coach R.C . Slocum are familiar with the city of San Diego . Crow was offensive coordinator of the Chargers under Tommy Prothro in 1974-75 , and Slocum visited with Holiday Bowl executives in San Diego last summer during a hospitality function for various coaches . Still , like Crow , Slocum has n't given up on the Cotton Bowl . `` Any time you 're in a conference situation , you 'd like to win the conference championship , '' Slocum said . `` If we ca n't , the Holiday Bowl is very attractive . We 've had contact with them over the last several years and we have a high impression of the people and the Holiday Bowl . '' The only way Texas A & M ( 3-1-1 in the SWC ) can win the conference championship is if the Aggies defeat their final three opponents -- Arkansas , Texas Christian and Texas , and Texas loses at Texas Christian on Saturday . The only way Texas ( 5-0 ) can lose the conference championship is if the Longhorns lose two of their final three , against TCU , Baylor and Texas A & M . `` We would be flattered if ( the Holiday Bowl ) would ask us , '' said DeLoss Dodds , Texas athletic director . `` . . . We plan to go to the Cotton Bowl , but we have three hard ones left . '' For Baylor ( 4-1-1 ) to win the SWC championship , the Bears must win their final two games -- against Rice and Texas -- and hope somebody else beats Texas . In that case , the choice for the Holiday Bowl would come down to the winner of the Texas A & M-Texas game . `` I think either one of those teams would be very attractive , '' said Vinnie Vinson , chairman of the Holiday Bowl 's team selection committee . `` The worst ( that probably would ) happen is that A & M would come in here 8-3-1 or Texas would be 9-2 . ''