James H. Geer , who has headed the FBI 's intelligence division during a four-year span in which some of the bureau 's most noted espionage cases were developed , is retiring , an FBI spokesman said Tuesday . Geer , 50 , is a 25-year bureau veteran , and his decision to end his FBI career `` comes as no surprise , '' said Milt Ahlerich , assistant FBI director for public affairs . FBI officials are required to retire by the age of 55 , and many leave to launch second careers after reaching 50 as Geer is said to be doing . Ahlerich dismissed as `` preposterous '' an intelligence analyst 's claim that Geer 's departure signals official displeasure over the FBI 's handling of the investigation of suspected Soviet spy Felix Bloch . Bloch , former second-in-command at the U.S. Embassy in Vienna , has been suspended from his State Department post and is under intense FBI investigation on suspicion of turning over secret material to a Soviet agent . Ahlerich said Geer 's decision to leave was his alone , and that he is regarded in the agency as `` an innovator whose accomplishments are second to none . '' The intelligence analyst , who would comment only anonymously , said Geer 's departure comes at a time of debate between the FBI and CIA over the role of counterintelligence and which agency is best handling the assignment . The analyst said the Bloch case `` fell between the cracks '' of the FBI and CIA operations . But Ahlerich said Geer had a significant role in establishing closer ties and more effective cooperation between the two agencies . Geer 's deputy assistant director , Gary Penrith , also is leaving the division to become head of the FBI 's Newark , N.J. , field office . No successors have been chosen , Ahlerich said . Geer has headed the FBI 's intelligence division since 1985 . The targets of successful counterintelligence investigations during the four-year period include an espionage ring headed by John Walker , former National Security Agency spy Ronald Pelton and Israeli spy Jonathan Pollard .