Whether or not war is averted , the international community must deploy `` some kind of peacekeeping force '' in the Middle East to guarantee long-term stability and ensure that Iraq can never again mount a military threat , President Bush said Tuesday . Even if Iraqi President Saddam Hussein relents and withdraws entirely from Kuwait , there can never be `` simply . . . a return to the pre-invasion borders or the status quo there , '' the President said . Shortly after Bush spoke , Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and Gen. Colin L. Powell , chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , set out on a trip to Saudi Arabia to consult with senior U.S. commanders and Saudi officials . The President 's remarks in a press conference , and additional comments by Vice President Dan Quayle , reflect White House thinking on the role of U.S. forces and other military units in the Persian Gulf after the current crisis is resolved , either militarily or diplomatically . At the heart of the concern is that if a diplomatic solution is found , or even after a limited war , Hussein could end up retaining his arsenal of chemical and biological weapons , as well as the capacity to produce nuclear weapons in the future . `` We 're going to have to cope with the question . . . of increased nuclear capability today beyond what it was several years ago , '' Bush said . Quayle , in a speech to a conference of the Foreign Policy Research Institute , said that `` once Iraqi forces have left Kuwait . . . and once the legitimate Kuwaiti government has been restored , our job will still not be over . '' `` Having tried to erase an entire nation from the face of the Earth , Saddam can not simply walk away without penalty and ( be left ) in a position to repeat his aggression , '' Quayle said . A senior Administration official , speaking on condition of anonymity , said he and others in the Administration have `` begun to do some thinking , some specific work . . . in terms of what a long-term security arrangement would look like . '' Another official said that those involved include Secretary of State James A. Baker III and Brent Scowcroft , the President 's national security adviser . One possibility , the senior official said , is a deployment of forces sponsored by the United Nations and made up mostly of Arab forces . `` That 's pretty much what our thinking is , '' he said . A White House official said some discussions have been held about the makeup of an international peacekeeping force with the partners in the coalition arrayed against Iraq , but `` it 's more of a concept than a reality . '' Foreign troops deployed under the U.N. flag have long been scattered throughout the region . The United Nations has 5,800 troops on Lebanon 's southern border with Israel and another peacekeeping force on the Sinai Peninsula . In addition , 2,100 troops sponsored by the United Nations serve as a buffer between Greeks and Turks on Cyprus . Referring to sensitivity in the region to any suggestion that the massive U.S. military deployment would bring about a long-term presence of U.S. forces , Bush said any peacekeeping units would be international , `` because I think there 's a problem if U.S. forces remain on the ground in the gulf for some time . '' But he said that naval units protecting the Strait of Hormuz at the mouth of the Persian Gulf have `` been there for a long time ; we will continue to stay there . '' The President grew suddenly animated when he defended the makeup of the U.S. force in the gulf . To the suggestion that a disproportionate number of those in the front lines are from minority groups , Bush replied : `` This argument that there 's some kind of racism . . . in this deployment -- I reject it . . . . It is simply not true . `` If you do n't believe me , believe Colin Powell ; and he has pretty good credentials in this field , outstanding credentials , '' Bush said , referring to the Army general who is the first black chief of staff . `` So I want to gun it down just as hard as I possibly can . '' He said there is `` a lot of truth '' to the allegation that the draftees sent to Vietnam represented `` kind of the lower rungs of society . '' `` This is different , '' Bush said , describing the current Army as one made up of `` the finest kids , the best trained , the best motivated , the high achievers -- not the low achievers . '' Bush acknowledged that `` you 'll read about one or two that say , 'Well , I did n't sign up to do this ; I signed up because I thought I could get a free education . ' He gets on the Phil Donahue Show , a big hero . That 's the tiny fraction of these kids that are over there . `` It is n't some cop-out armed services that they are now getting caught up in -- something that they were unaware of , '' he added . Times staff writers David Lauter and Don Shannon contributed to this report .