Chemotherapy undergone before radiation treatment doubled the survival rate of a group of patients with the most common type of inoperable lung cancer , according to a national study released today in the New England Journal of Medicine . Of the patients who underwent only radiation therapy , 11 % survived three years after treatment , contrasted with 23 % who underwent five weeks of chemotherapy followed by six weeks of daily radiation therapy , according to the lead author of the study , Dr. Robert O. Dillman , medical director of the Hoag Cancer Center in Newport Beach . `` The good news is that just by adding that little bit of chemotherapy , there was a doubling in the survival rate , '' Dillman said . `` The bad news is that still did n't help about 75 % of the patients . '' Dr. John Glaspy , director of UCLA 's joint oncology clinic , said the study proves there are benefits to chemotherapy . But he noted that even the improved survival rates in the study were not good . `` The big point to the reader is , you 'd better quit smoking -- quick , '' Glaspy said . `` Because these big breakthroughs are changing survival rates by four months ( on average ) , and that ai n't much . '' The three-year study began in 1984 and examined 155 patients with inoperable non-small-cell lung cancer , which affects as many as 40,000 Americans , Dillman said . It was sponsored by the National Cancer Institute and conducted by a cooperative group of oncologists from Hoag , Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston , Dartmouth College in New Hampshire , UC San Diego Medical Center , McGill University in Montreal and the University of Missouri in Columbia . Patients with this kind of inoperable cancer were given a five-week course of chemotherapy -- two doses of the drug cisplatin and five doses of vinblastine . The duration was short enough so that patients were able to tolerate the side effects of the chemotherapy and still benefit from radiation treatment , Dillman said . This was followed by six weeks of daily treatments of high-dose radiation therapy , concentrated on the chest area where the cancer was visible , Dillman said . Major tumor shrinkage was seen in 44 % of the patients who got both chemotherapy and radiation , contrasted with 35 % in patients who received only radiation , the study said . After one year of treatment , 55 % of those who underwent chemotherapy and radiation therapy survived , contrasted with 40 % among the radiation-only group . Three years after treatment , 23 % of the chemotherapy-radiation group had survived , contrasted with 11 % for the radiation-only group . The three-year study was followed by three more years of tracking the patients and analyzing the data , Dillman said . At last count , three of the chemotherapy- radiation patients were still alive more than four years after treatment . Two were from Massachusetts General Hospital and one from McGill University . A confirming study sponsored by the National Cancer Institute is under way across the country . Dillman said the key finding is that chemotherapy , especially in earlier stages , is more effective in lung cancer than many doctors realize . `` Most patients with lung cancer are diagnosed by family practitioners or general internists , and they often have their initial care and treatment decisions made by those physicians , '' Dillman said . `` We know now that if we wait until ( final stages of lung cancer ) then chemotherapy is really too late . Patients will have severe side effects , wo n't tolerate the therapy , and it wo n't help . ''