Diamond Strawberry , daughter of Darryl , wiggled and squiggled in her Dodger daddy 's arms and did n't really listen to what he had to say . Everybody else in the dining room did , and this is what he said : '' At this point , my life is headed in the right direction . I 'm only 28 years old and my career is on the uprise . All I want to do is what Darryl Strawberry does best -- and that 's bangin ' on that ball . '' Any questions ? Yes , there were questions . Strawberry fielded them cleanly Thursday . `` Why did you leave New York ? '' ( To get to the other side . ) `` If the Mets offered you the same money as the Dodgers , would you still be a Met ? '' ( No . ) `` What will the pressure be playing in your hometown ? '' ( Pressure ? In Los Angeles ? What comedy club do you work in ? ) `` What position will you play in Los Angeles ? '' ( Outfield . ) `` What will your number be in Los Angeles ? '' ( Probably 1-900 . ) A lot of New Yorkers were in the neighborhood , here for Sunday 's Giants-Rams game . They had lots of questions for The Darryl . As I was leaving , somebody even stuck a microphone into the face of Diamond Strawberry , who is 2 . She tried to eat it . About the only thing Strawberry did not get asked was whether Edwin Moses , Willie Gault and Bo Jackson had contacted him yet about that bobsled thing . This is a big bobsled town , Los Angeles . Strawberry can tell you . It 's what your typical Crenshaw High guy wants to grow up to do . Anyhow , anybody who loves baseball or who loves or hates Los Angeles or New York must have a question or two for Dodger Darryl . We have a few , too . Let 's play 20 Questions , shall we ? 1 . OK , why DID he leave New York ? Darryl says : `` I just wanted to get away from it all . '' If you ask me , though , I still think it was that La Guardia flight-pattern thing . At Dodger Stadium , the loudest noise pattern he will encounter is Lasorda burping up those milkshakes . 2 . What did Fred Claire do that no Met would do ? Darryl says : `` He sat down and talked to me like a person . '' That darned Fred Claire . Guy knows every trick in the book . 3 . OK , if New York had matched L.A. 's offer , which team would Straw be stirring ? Darryl says : `` The team I 'm standing here with right now , the L.A . Dodgers . '' Yeah , and I know why . It 's our world-famous affordable housing . 4 . Why does California keep picking on New York ? We took away the Dodgers . We took away the Giants . We took Dave Winfield . We took Kevin Mitchell . Now Strawberry . And I hear that , in the divorce settlement , we get Ivana . 5 . What will New Yorkers do to get even ? Hey , they already took Steve Sax . They could go after Fernando . They could even take Juan Samuel . ( Please . ) 6 . OK , what position WILL Strawberry play ? Lasorda says : `` Any position he wants . '' ( Pa-rump-bump . ) But seriously , ladies and germs , Darryl says : `` I 'll play where they put me . I do n't want to be recognized as a person with an attitude . I do n't have an attitude . '' Fortunately for Darryl , in California we have many fine attitude enhancement centers . 7 . What did Strawberry 's buddy Eric Davis have to say about all this ? Darryl says : `` His comments were : 'What a lineup ! '' ' That 's an impressive comment coming from someone who plays for the World Series champions . Doubly impressive is that the Valley 's own Eric , of Woodland Hills , did not say to his best bud Darryl , who lives in Encino : `` Whoa , what a lineup , Straw dude ! Excellent ! '' 8 . What will Strawberry hit for the Dodgers ? Baseballs . Many , many baseballs . 9 . OK , what number WILL Strawberry wear ? Darryl says : `` I have to speak with Bill Russell about that . I want 18 , but he 's got it . There 's also 44 because that 's what Eric wears for the Reds , but I do n't know . '' Well , I know , Darryl . Aaron , Reggie , Eric . . . have n't we had enough 44s ? Do what Carlton Fisk did , man . Turn your old number backward . The Dodgers have n't even retired 81 . 10 . Will the fans in L.A. treat Darryl different than New York 's ? Darryl says ( after he eventually stops laughing ) : `` Time will tell . '' Yes , it will . When the time is 7:30 p.m. , Dodger ticket-holders will be cheering as Darryl comes to bat . When the time is 9:30 p.m. , Dodger ticket-holders will be tuning those AM radio dials to KABC-790 in their cars , to hear Darryl bat in the bottom of the eighth . 11 . Is Darryl ready for life in L.A. ? He wore a gray suit to his press conference Thursday -- with no socks . You tell me . 12 . Did Darryl get Jose Canseco 's kind of money ? Yes . Green . Lots . His contract is worth $ 20,250,000 . It will be renegotiated to $ 20,250,100 , soon as Darryl remembers that California requires his car to have a smog check . 13 . What does Strawberry think of the Dodgers ? Darryl says : `` It 's probably the finest organization in baseball . '' Boy , are those Seattle people going to be ticked off when they hear this . 14 . Does the 1991 Strawberry come with a guarantee ? Darryl says : `` Fred Claire has taken a lot of heat . But I 'll tell you what : He wo n't take no heat for this . I 'll make sure of that . '' He 'd better , too , because sometimes those California sportswriters get so vicious , they 'll write an entire bad sentence about a guy . 15 . What is Kirk Gibson 's role in all this ? 1988 . 16 . Is it fair for one town to have Magic Johnson , Wayne Gretzky , Bo Jackson AND Darryl Strawberry ? No , and I hear Fay Vincent 's got that John Dowd guy working on it . 17 . Will Eric Davis join the Dodgers someday ? Yes , and I hope that Marge Schott has to pay his plane fare . 18 . What in New York will Strawberry miss most ? 162 games . ( Pa-rump-bump . ) 19 . How will he remember New York most ? Darryl says : `` I got criticized a lot , but I 'm not that bad of a person . '' Darryl , speaking for sportswriters everywhere , after dealing with Kirk Gibson and Eddie Murray , I would n't call you a bad person if you set fire to the stadium . 20 . Any other questions for Darryl ? Yes . Would you promise never to refer to $ 20,250,000 as `` 20 million and change ? '' Thanks . Now sit down and talk like a person .