A U.S. executive with Qintex Australia Ltd. said Friday that the company 's plan to build a luxurious resort in Dana Point is still on track , despite the bankruptcy of a subsidiary . The subsidiary , Qintex Entertainment , filed for protection from creditors this week after missing a $ 5.9-million payment to MCA Inc. that it owed under a film distribution agreement . The bankruptcy was one more sign of trouble at Qintex Australia Ltd. , the parent company , which owns 43 % of Qintex Entertainment 's stock . Just last week , Qintex Australia Ltd. saw its $ 1.5-billion purchase of the MGM/UA film studios fall through when Qintex was unable to scrape together what was essentially a $ 50-million down payment . `` The companies are completely separate entities , '' said the executive , who asked not to be identified . `` As of today , there 's no indication there 'll be any impact at all on the resort . '' But local officials worried Friday that Qintex might back out of the resort project . `` We 're anxiously waiting to hear something definite on this , '' said Dana Point Mayor Eileen Krause . The resort hotel could bring a big increase in tax revenue to the small , newly incorporated city . At least one local company was n't worried , however . Stein-Brief Group said its deal to sell Qintex 232 acres in Dana Point for the resort has already been closed . Sources said most of the $ 132-million price of the land had already been paid in cash to Stein-Brief and its partner , Hawaiian hotel developer Hemmeter Corp. Not yet closed , sources said , is the sale of a further 115 acres in Dana Point , owned by Chandler-Sherman Corp. , to Qintex for $ 115 million . Chandler-Sherman said it does not talk to the media and refused to comment on the deal . An Australian stock analyst , Bryan Madden of Prudential-Bache in Melbourne , said Qintex had made only a deposit on the Chandler-Sherman property and was deferring payment of most of the $ 115 million until 1991 . Staff writers Bill Billiter and Jonathan Weber contributed to this story .