The risk of becoming infected with the AIDS virus through a blood transfusion may be `` fourfold fewer than reported previously , '' according to a new study by American Red Cross researchers published in today 's New England Journal of Medicine . The study also cites preliminary data that the AIDS risk to recipients of blood transfusions `` has been decreasing by more than 30 % a year '' between 1985 and 1988 . But AIDS experts disagree about whether the new estimate -- one infected unit per 153,000 units of blood transfused -- is likely to be more accurate than a previous estimate -- one in 40,000 -- which was published by U.S. Centers for Disease Control ( CDC ) researchers in the same journal last year . No matter which estimate is believed , the overall risk of AIDS infection by transfusion remains quite small when compared to other commonly accepted risks . For example , the risk of being killed in an automobile accident in the United States is about one in 5,000 per year . The new estimate is `` good news , '' Dr. Jay E. Menitove of the Blood Center of Southeastern Wisconsin in Milwaukee said in a telephone interview . The overall risk of transfusion infection is `` very , very small . . . . We really are now dealing at the very marginal edge in terms of reducing risk further . '' The various estimates are `` not that different , '' said the CDC 's Dr. John W. Ward , who led the research team that prepared the earlier estimate . `` All of them are estimates , '' Ward said in a telephone interview from Atlanta . `` None of them are direct measures ( of the number of AIDS-infected units of blood that escape detection ) . '' After reading the study , Ward said there is a `` possibility '' that the AIDS risk from transfused blood is decreasing but added `` we do n't want to decrease our vigilance . '' The American Red Cross study is one of three articles on transfusion AIDS published in the New England Journal , along with an editorial by Menitove that calls on blood banks and public health officials to work harder to prevent individuals likely to be infected with the human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) , the cause of AIDS , from donating blood . Among the strategies that are advocated are more explicit questioning of prospective donors about their risk of HIV infection and recruiting more female blood donors , who as a group are less likely than men to be infected with HIV . The laboratory tests performed on all donated blood to detect the AIDS virus are accurate , but not foolproof . As a result , if HIV-infected individuals donate blood , some contaminated blood may escape detection . Over the last two years , most estimates of the risk of becoming infected with HIV through a blood transfusion have been in the range of one in 40,000 to one in 60,000 per unit of blood transfused . Because the typical transfusion patient receives about five units of blood , the actual risk to the average patient would be higher . The new estimate is based on data from 17 million American Red Cross blood donations between April , 1985 , and December , 1987 . It was prepared by a research team led by Paul D. Cumming . Using data on the incidence of HIV-positive blood donations and on the accuracy record of HIV blood tests , the researchers estimated the chances that an infected unit would slip through undetected . They estimated that between 67 and 227 HIV-positive blood units `` entered the nation 's blood supply undetected in 1987 '' out of 20 million units of blood and its components transfused annually . Their best estimate was 131 units , which corresponds to a risk to a patient of one in 153,000 per unit transfused . The American Red Cross study also cited a `` preliminary analysis '' of 1988 data . This showed that the `` most likely number of HIV-positive units entering the blood supply '' declined from 368 units in 1985 to 87 units in 1988 . By comparison , the CDC , using a slightly different method , estimated in a February , 1988 , New England Journal article that `` as many as 460 recipients of screened blood may become infected annually . '' This corresponds to a risk to a patient of about one in 40,000 per unit transfused . Ward pointed out that the American Red Cross does not collect blood in New York City , large parts of Texas and San Francisco , areas with relatively large numbers of HIV-infected people . As of the end of July , there had been about 102,600 AIDS cases in the United States , including about 2,700 cases of transfusion-related AIDS , according to federal statistics . An estimated 12,000 transfusion recipients in the United States were infected with HIV before testing of the blood supply began in March , 1985 .