El Toro High School presented a different version of the two-minute offense Saturday at Tustin High , one that produced points in the water . The Charger water polo team scored twice with less than two minutes remaining in first half , and J.P. Mathot scored the game-winning goal with 1:54 to play as El Toro ( 25-3 ) defeated Capistrano Valley , 3-2 , in the Southern Section 4-A semifinals . El Toro will face Long Beach Wilson ( 22-6 ) in the final at 8:45 Wednesday night at Belmont Plaza in Long Beach . Wilson beat Corona del Mar , 8-4 , in the other semifinal . El Toro will be seeking its first 4-A championship after winning consecutive 3-A titles in 1988 and '89 . `` We might have an experience advantage over some teams , '' Mathot said , `` because we are n't happy just to be in the finals , but we want to win the whole thing . '' Capistrano Valley ( 23-4 ) has dropped the past three meetings with El Toro , including last year 's 3-A championship game . Mathot , who scored 31 goals in his previous five games , went scoreless for the first 22 minutes . `` The defense for both teams today was unbelievable , '' El Toro Coach Ron Stoll said . `` I thought J.P. was playing well , but he got frustrated because he tried to do too much . '' `` I thought I played lousy today , '' Mathot said , `` but I tried to focus myself to do at least one thing right on that last play . '' With the game tied , 2-2 , and two minutes remaining , Mathot zeroed in when he received the ball in the hole . He turned Capistrano Valley defender Dan Hancock at the two-meter line , then fired his game-winner past goalie Nick Kittredge . `` We did n't crash down on Mathot on that play , '' Capistrano Valley Coach Don Cholodenko said , `` but we lost the game because we did n't capitalize on our six-on-five advantages . '' The Cougars went zero for three on the one-man advantages , but El Toro converted on two consecutive Capistrano Valley kick-outs , with Greg Craycraft and Jason Kneitel scoring , to erase a 2-0 deficit late in the first half . MICHAEL ITAGAKI