The biggest elections news next month will be whether Manhattan Borough President David N. Dinkins becomes the first black mayor of New York City and whether Lt. Gov . L. Douglas Wilder becomes the first black governor of Virginia -- or any other state . The underlying question in both contests : Can a black candidate be elected in a constituency where blacks are a relatively small minority ? While the outcomes of the November races are still too close to call , Californians may be especially interested in the results , having already answered the question . Although blacks made up less than 15 % of Los Angeles , Tom Bradley was elected mayor in 1973 , 16 years before Dinkins was nominated in New York , where black people are 25 % of the city 's population . Current Rep. Mervyn M. Dymally ( D-Compton ) became the first black person elected lieutenant governor of California in 1975 , 10 years before Wilder won the same position in Virginia . Then in 1982 , when the black population of California was proportionately much smaller than the black population of Virginia is today ( about 19 % ) , Bradley ran for governor and lost by a hairbreadth margin . California 's brand of black politics has led the nation in other ways . Willie Brown ( D-San Francisco ) was elected Speaker of the State Assembly nine years before Washington 's Ron Brown was elected chairman of the Democratic National Committee . State Assemblywoman Maxine Waters ( D-Los Angeles ) was elected chair of the Democratic Caucus four years before Rep. William H. Gray III ( D-Pa. ) was elected chairman of the Congressional Democratic Caucus . In 1986 , Waters wrote a law , vetoed by Gov . George Deukmejian , requiring state fund managers to divest stocks of companies doing business in South Africa . That was the same year black congressmen finally rammed through apartheid sanctions over President Reagan 's veto . If the old axiom , `` As Maine goes so goes the nation , '' is true of presidential elections , the paraphrase -- as California goes , so goes the nation -- is true in black politics . California has set the agenda for important issues and developments in black politics across the nation . Geography and demography help explain California 's exemplary position . Because most of state 's black population did not arrive until after World War II , California had no long history of legal segregation . The West did n't experience the freedom rides or anything like the Montgomery bus boycott of 1955 . California 's three largest cities do not have black majorities , unlike Georgia 's Atlanta , Michigan 's Detroit or New Jersey 's Newark . So in the early '70s , California did not experience a period when black people were first assuming political control in the biggest cities of a state . In 1962 , however , voters in Watts elected Augustus F. Hawkins ( D-Los Angeles ) -- one of only five predominantly black congressional districts in the entire nation then represented by a black member of Congress . Major precedents for black politics were set in 1970 , when Berkeley elected Rep. Ron Dellums , the first black Democrat to win in a district where whites were in the majority . It would be 12 more years before another black candidate , Katie Hall of Indiana , won such a position -- and only for one term . The importance of the California experience has implications for the future . In the next decade , the tests will not be what black people can accomplish within their own communities , but what they can accomplish in coalition with other interest groups . Other than improving the numbers of registered voters and turnout , blacks have already mined the prospects within majority-black areas . Excepting New Orleans , every congressional district with a black majority now has a black member of Congress . And , according to the Joint Center for Political Studies , the leading black think tank , every black-majority city with a population of more 200,000 people has a black mayor . Future growth of black political power then depends on what blacks can accomplish in coalition with whites , women , unions , business groups , political parties and other minorities . The key is coalition-building and that is where black people in California have had some truly remarkable successes . With four black members of Congress , California and New York have the largest black delegations in the House , yet New York has more black citizens than California . Perhaps more important , all New York black congressmen are from districts where blacks make up no less than 47 % of the voting-age population . Only one black congressman from California , Hawkins , comes from a heavily black area ; Democrat Julian C. Dixon 's district , Culver City , is less than 40 % black . With the exception of one Missouri district , represented by Democrat Alan Wheat , only in California have black candidates been elected to Congress with so few black votes available -- and survived for more than one term . Turning the perspective around , California is where people who are n't black are most likely to support a black candidate . A combination of political and psychological factors make the Golden State a fertile ground for black politics . `` In California , black elected officials can act as honest brokers between other ethnic groups , which is a situation where race is not as important as consensus building '' said California native Jeffrey Stewart , now a history professor at George Mason University . `` This is particularly true vis-a-vis blacks and Mexicans or Asian-Americans , who are not as well organized yet . '' John Smith , who has worked with Hawkins for more than 25 years , agrees that organization has been critical in building black clout . `` The fact that black people are such a small group in California helps make them more cohesive and focused , with clear objectives . None of this came easily . I was living in Pasadena when Tom Bradley first ran in 1969 . Nearly every black person I knew in my neighborhood . . . was stuffing envelopes or putting stamps on mailers . '' However Bradley 's current problems are resolved , one reason for his past success is that California 's population includes the most educated , successful black people in America . According to the Joint Center for Political Studies , the metropolitan areas of San Diego , Los Angeles and San Francisco have the highest levels of black educational achievement . These are also three of the four areas where blacks own the most expensive homes . In addition to socioeconomic stature , black political success is a reflection of an unconventional electorate that could consecutively support such dissimilar governors as Ronald Reagan and Edmund G. Brown Jr . According to former Rep. Yvonne Burke , `` As a whole , California voters are not particularly liberal or particularly conservative . What they really are is non-traditional ; so many of the issues they 're involved with , like ecology , do n't fall along old racial lines . '' Dixon points out that California politics are not characterized by machines that decide -- or limit -- who runs for office . He agrees that California voters are an independent bunch : `` After all , '' Dixon said , `` that 's how the state wound up with a Republican governor and a Democratic lieutenant governor . I 'm not saying that there are no racial problems in California , but because voters are somewhat more open-minded and independent , they are much more willing to go past race and look at a black politician as a politician who just happens to be black . ''