Not content to leave his gripe with Amwest Surety Insurance Co. to the courts , Massachusetts insurance agent Alfred D. Jordan has taken his case to some major stockholders of the company as well . Insurance Diagnostics of Massachusetts Insurance Agency , which Jordan owns , filed suit against Amwest Surety Insurance Co. of Woodland Hills for about $ 340,000 in Superior Court in Van Nuys , claiming that the company owes it thousands of dollars worth of commissions for selling Amwest 's insurance policies . Insurance Diagnostics claims Amwest owes it commissions for marketing various surety bonds , which are like insurance policies that guarantee the performance of the holder , such as a building contractor , to a third party . The bond is a financial guarantee that the work will be performed . But Jordan has also sent a letter to major Amwest stockholders complaining that the company was refusing to pay him the money he said he was owed . Robert C. Goodell , chief financial officer of Amwest Insurance Group ( Amwest Surety Insurance Co. 's parent ) , said the company has acted in good faith toward Jordan , but declined to comment further on the case , which was filed in April . Last month , a judge ordered Amwest and Insurance Diagnostics to take their cases to an independent arbitrator before Feb. 1 . The judge warned that if Insurance Diagnostics did not try to arbitrate the case first , he might dismiss it . Last Monday the law firm originally representing Insurance Diagnostics in court sought a judge 's permission to stop working on the case because the company allegedly owes the law firm $ 17,621 . The law firm , Pettit & Martin of San Jose , complained in a court filing that Jordan had refused to communicate with his attorneys . Jordan admitted that he could not pay the attorneys but denied that he had lost touch with them . In the six months that ended June 30 , Amwest 's net income increased 5 % to $ 1.66 million from $ 1.58 million a year before , and its net premiums -- an insurance industry measure of total revenue -- climbed 31 % to $ 22.4 million from $ 17.1 million in 1989 . According to the lawsuit , Insurance Diagnostics had an agreement , beginning in February , 1987 , to be the exclusive agent for Amwest in Massachusetts in marketing the companies ' surety bonds . At the center of the case is the question of how much money Amwest owes Jordan and his agency on business Amwest did in Massachusetts . Insurance Diagnostics claims that it was to be paid a cut of any business that Amwest did in Massachusetts , whether or not it was generated by Insurance Diagnostics . Amwest was also supposed to pay Insurance Diagnostics a contingent commission as a kind of bonus if Amwest did a large amount of business in the state , the agency claims . Court records show that Amwest and Insurance Diagnostics disagree over whether that bonus agreement was in effect in 1989 , and whether the bonus was to be paid only for business that Insurance Diagnostics generated -- or whether it was for all business Amwest did in Massachusetts . As part of its lawsuit , Insurance Diagnostics tried to get a judge to force Amwest to immediately put up $ 135,692 -- the amount the Massachusetts agency claimed it could easily prove Amwest owed . But a judge ordered Amwest only to put up about $ 34,000 .