Tenzin Gyatso , the 14th Dalai Lama of Tibet , was awarded the 1989 Nobel Peace Prize today for decades of nonviolent efforts to free his country from Chinese rule . The world 's leading Buddhist received the news early in the morning at the Big Canyon home of Clifford and Elaine Heinz in Newport Beach , where he is staying while attending a peace conference in Newport Beach . `` I am deeply touched to be chosen as this year 's recipient , '' he said . `` I hope this prize will provide courage to the 6 million people of Tibet . '' While he said he hopes his selection will strengthen those pursuing the cause of peace , he also accused China of trying to systematically crush the Tibetan people . `` Since the imposition of martial law in Lhasa last March , Tibet has been sealed off , and while global attention has focused on the tragic events in China , a systematic effort to crush the spirit and national identity of the Tibetan people is being pursued by the government of the People 's Republic , '' he said . `` Tibetans today are facing the real possibility of elimination as a people and a nation . '' In its citation , the Nobel Peace Prize Committee mentioned the Dalai Lama 's rejection of violence and his preachings of respect for all living things . It praised his `` constructive and forward-looking proposals for the solution of international conflicts . '' Analysts said the intent of the award was to deliver a message of support to the pro-democracy movement in China . They also indicated the prize might help eventually break the deadlock between China , which has occupied the Himalayan nation known as the Roof of the World since 1950 , and the Dalai Lama , a popular leader of an exile government in Dharmsala , India . Today , the spiritual leader accused the Chinese Communist government of `` practicing a form of genocide by relocating millions of Chinese settlers into Tibet . '' He said that there are now more Chinese than Tibetans in Tibet . He asked that `` this massive population transfer be stopped . '' Speaking at the Newport Marriott Hotel , the Dalai Lama said the students who demonstrated in Beijing earlier this year `` have given me great hope for the future of China and Tibet . I feel that their movement follows the tradition of Mahatma Gandhi 's . . . nonviolence which has deeply inspired me ever since I was a small boy . ''