Three years ago , 62-year-old San Diego entertainment entrepreneur Franklin Fried was looking for a new business to get into . So , Fried brainstormed for a product that would satisfy Americans ' yearning to go back to a simpler time , for something with mystique that was romantic and perhaps a bit naughty , too . Something like . . . river boat gambling . Approached by Iowa officials eager to find new ways of boosting a state economy weakened by an agricultural recession , Fried offered to start an operation that would send paddle-wheel steamboats churning along the Mississippi and Missouri rivers that border the state . Fried saw river boats stocked with tourists eager to try their hands at blackjack or roulette as potentially a unique and lucrative new tourist attraction . Each boat could generate $ 15 million to $ 17 million in annual revenues , a portion of which would flow into the state 's coffers . On Tuesday , this scenario took one step closer to reality as Fried Schegan & Associates of San Diego was selected by the Missouri River Historical Development Inc. to operate Iowa 's first river boat gambling operation . The nonprofit organization is representing Sioux City and Woodbury County , both situated near the state 's western border . Fried describes the river boat idea as `` a small theme park on the river '' combining reverence for history and an escape from modern-day complexity . `` To that , we 're adding the intrigue of gambling -- something slightly naughty that appeals to most everyone , '' Fried said . `` Combine those factors , and I think I have a chance to hit a home run . '' No one will be cheering harder for Fried than Iowa tourism officials . Earlier in the decade , the Iowa economy was hit hard by the agricultural recession , said Dennis Guffey , deputy director of the Iowa Department of Economic Development , which oversees the state tourism industry . Subsequently , state officials have actively sought to diversify the state 's economy , emphasizing tourism . According to Guffey , such efforts led to a record $ 2.1 billion in tourism dollars in 1988 . Now , Iowa officials are betting on river boat gambling to add to their success . `` We 've supported this from the very start and think it has the potential to become a huge industry for the state , '' Guffey said . Tourism expenditures from river boat gambling could pump $ 50 million annually into Iowa 's economy and create jobs . In addition , the state expects to receive $ 5 million a year in taxes from gambling revenues . `` River boats can bring to life the rich lore of the Mississippi , the Mark Twain era , '' Guffey said , and attract `` people from across the nation . '' But not everybody in Iowa has been so receptive to the new venture . Indeed , it has taken more than three years to persuade the Iowa legislature to approve a bill permitting gambling river boats to travel on the state 's waterways . And , until Republican Gov . Terry E. Branstad signed a bill into law on April 27 , opponents , concerned that their state would become another Atlantic City or Las Vegas , vociferously objected to the proposal . Opposition from groups such as the Iowa Alliance Against Riverboat Gambling fueled considerable political debate and apparently caused legislators to waffle on the issue . The House and Senate both rejected proposed river boat gambling legislation at least once during the past three years before finally passing a bill this spring . Getting the law passed was a major accomplishment for Fried and his partner , John J. Schegan . But many obstacles remained in their path . The partnership had to wait for individual counties to approve river boat operations and then had to compete against a handful of other prospective operators to win individual contracts . Besides serving Sioux City , the partnership hopes to win contracts to establish operations in Dubuque County and a region of Southeastern Iowa that includes the cities of Burlington , Ft. Madison and Keokuk . Winning contracts for those locations would allow Fried and Schegan to run river boats along the Mississippi . The partnership still needs to receive a gambling license from the Iowa Racing and Gaming Commission , which is expected to issue such documents in March . The state legislation allows operations to begin in April 1991 . `` The toughest thing to overcome was trying to introduce gambling , even on a limited basis , into a 'pure ' state like Iowa , '' said Schegan , who , with Fried , spent most of the last year crisscrossing the state to present their proposals before anybody was willing to listen . `` Iowans do n't like change , '' Schegan said . `` They wanted to know if we had honorable intentions and whether we would live up to them . '' And what did Schegan and Fried tell Iowans ? `` We are creating an entertainment entity that offers limited gambling , not a gambling entity that has little entertainment . '' Schegan and Fried plan to offer hearty Midwestern meals from 100-year-old recipes , music from the era and live theater . Indeed , the river boat gambling bill , which was passed with built-in restrictions , enforces the partnership 's promise . Gamblers , for example , will be permitted to wager no more than $ 5 a bet and can lose no more than $ 200 each trip . In addition , only 30 % of the river boat can be used for gambling . Other states , including Illinois , Wisconsin , Indiana , Ohio and Louisiana , are now considering river boat gambling legislation as well . Thus far , Fried and Schegan have recruited 14 investors , including singer Harry Belafonte , to raise money for their venture . The partnership expects to complete a feasibility study , required by the racing and gaming commission , by the end of the month . Once a license is obtained , the partnership will be seeking additional investors . Fried and Schegan plan to spend about $ 12 million per river boat and initially plan to build three vessels . Each of the vessels will be about 200-feet long , 60-feet wide , four stories high , and carry 750 to 1000 passengers . Each boat will employ 300 to 350 workers . Although Franklin says he now knows plenty about river boats , he concedes that he never pictured himself as a gambling river boat operator . Born in Chicago , Fried , began his career in the entertainment business when he became an unemployed welder . `` I was friends with the late Al Grossman ( who later became manager of singers Bob Dylan and Peter , Paul and Mary ) when he was first starting out in the entertainment business . I had just been laid off and he needed a gofer . I took the job . '' After gaining some experience , Fried launched Triangle Productions , a Chicago-based concert promotion firm that attracted big-name performers such as the Beatles and Frank Sinatra to Chicago 's stages . A decade ago , his first wife 's medical problems brought the couple to the West Coast and he moved to San Diego four years ago . Fried was first introduced to a river boat when a business associate asked him in 1983 to join the board of the Delta Queen Steamboat Co. , a New Orleans-based operator of two , overnight , luxury steamboats . Shortly afterward , Fried was asked to become president of the company . And that 's when Fried fell in love with the river boat . `` You have to get hooked when the paddle wheels start turning . . . you feel like you 're going back to the turn of the century , '' Fried said . `` It 's a tremendous feeling . That 's the charm of river boats . '' At first , Boston-born Schegan , 31 , knew little about river boats . But , upon arriving in New Orleans on a hitch-hiking trip across the United States at age 19 , Schegan felt the river boat 's lure . `` I was intrigued by New Orleans , its rich history . . . and of course , its restaurants and bars , '' said Schegan , who began working as a pot washer in a restaurant in the city 's French Quarter . `` I wanted to become a great restaurateur . '' For the next several years , Schegan became involved in several successful restaurant enterprises . Then came the opportunity to work for the Delta Queen Steamboat Co. and to manage the Mississippi Queen . That 's where he also met Fried . For a year , Schegan lived aboard the Mississippi Queen and traveled along the Mississippi '' I got to see all these old historical cities , '' Schegan said . `` You can imagine what kind of impression it left on a kid from Boston . It gave me a chance to find out how diversified America is and explore its past . `` I became a time traveler . '' Schegan said .