Bo Jackson 's helmet was rolling on the field like a bowling ball after San Diego safety Martin Bayless welcomed the Raider tailback back to the NFL . But Jackson was smiling when he got up after Bayless knocked his helmet off with a jarring hit . `` That 's part of my game plan , '' Jackson explained later . `` The object of it is to have three of your four ( helmet ) buttons fastened and let the last one stay open so when they hit you your helmet flies off and it makes them think they 're hitting you hard , which they 're really not . Then you put your helmet on and go do it again . It 's just a little psychology . '' Jackson lost his helmet twice that way against the Chargers . Is Jackson 's psychological ploy effective ? `` Of course , '' Jackson said . But Bayless thought it was n't a ploy . `` If you see his helmet flying 10 yards you know what happened , '' Bayless said . `` All I know is that his helmet came off . That 's like a person driving a car without a seat belt . '' But Raider nose tackle Bob Golic joked that Jackson did n't fasten his helmet because Jackson , playing his first football game this season after spending nine months with the Kansas City Royals , was so confused that he thought he was wearing a baseball helmet . `` It does n't matter how bad I talk about Golic , he 'll take it as a compliment , '' Jackson said Said Golic : `` I just told him to buckle up because this ai n't baseball any more . He 's a tough guy . '' Switching sports as quickly as Diana Ross changes costumes , Jackson rushed for 53 yards in 12 carries and scored two touchdowns as the Raiders defeated the Chargers , 24-9 . `` I 've got some bruises , '' Jackson said , maintaining that it took only one hit for him to get reacclimated . `` But they 'll only last for a day or so . Luckily we 've got a week off and I 'll be healed before we go to Kansas City . '' It was the third most productive opening game of Jackson 's four NFL seasons . He rushed for 37 yards and no touchdowns against New England in his first game of the 1987 season and gained 70 yards in 20 carries and scored a touchdown against the Kansas City Chiefs in his first game of the 1988 season . Jackson rushed for 85 yards in 11 carries and scored a touchdown against the Chiefs in his first game last season . `` Bo did basically what I thought he would do , '' Raider Coach Art Shell said . `` He came in and ran hard and scored a couple of touchdowns . That 's Bo Jackson . He 's a big play guy . Bo did all right for the first time out . '' Jackson did most of the work in the Raiders ' first touchdown drive , rushing for 28 yards on five carries as the Raiders went 35 yards in six plays to take a 10-3 lead on Jackson 's five-yard touchdown run with 8:51 left in the first half . Although the play was designed to go inside , he cut it to the outside and carried linebacker Henry Rolling into the end zone on his back like a sack of flour . `` It does n't matter if someone 's on my back , '' Jackson said . `` If I 've got the strength to pull them into the end zone , that 's what I 'm going to do . `` It 's fun playing football because you ca n't hit anybody in baseball without getting thrown out of the game . '' Like most smart running backs , Jackson credited his offensive line . `` The line blocked their ( butts ) off and gave me a crack and I took it , '' Jackson said . `` It was just hard-nosed blocking . Whenever they give you holes like they were giving you this afternoon you ca n't do anything but run for daylight . '' With Greg Bell sidelined with a sprained ankle , Jackson replaced Bell in the Raiders ' tailback rotation . He alternated with starting tailback Marcus Allen , who rushed for 45 yards in eight carries and caught three passes for 50 yards . Is it a problem for Jackson to alternate with Allen ? `` I think we do a good job splitting time , '' Jackson said . `` I do n't think we have any selfish players on the team . Whether it 's Marcus and ( fullback Steve Smith ) back there or Steve and Bo or Vance ( Mueller ) and Steve , we go out there and we play to win , not to go out and say , 'Hey , I am the starting tailback here and I run the show . ' It 's not like that because whenever you start to have individuals on a team , that 's when you start going downhill . '' Although Allen opened the game in the Raider backfield , Jackson started the second half . Jackson culminated the Raiders ' first drive of the third quarter by scoring on a seven-yard run to give the Raiders a 17-6 lead . This play was designed to go outside , but Jackson cut inside at the two and ran over Charger cornerback Sam Seale at the goal line . Although Jackson practiced for just one week after playing baseball for nine months , he appeared in superb football shape . Raider quarterback Jay Schroeder , who played in the Toronto Blue Jays ' farm system before deciding to concentrate on football , marvels at Jackson 's ability to play major league baseball and pro football . `` It 's just a credit to Bo , '' Schroeder said . `` To be able to come in after playing baseball for nine months , take 10 days off and play in a big-time football game is just phenomenal . '' Raider defensive end Howie Long , whom Jackson describes as his closest friend on the Raiders , loves to watch Jackson run . `` He has so much power that he just drags two or three people three or four yards , '' Long said of Jackson . `` You better buckle it up when you tackle him . Just ask those cornerbacks . '' But Jackson 's speed enables him to outrun cornerbacks . `` Have you ever been behind a Porsche when the turbo kicks in and it 's like an explosion and it jets from 80 to ( 110 ) ? '' Long asked .