'' What have you got in this thing , lady ? '' asked a porter . He was lugging my ice chest toward the ticket counter as if he were pulling an Egyptian pyramid . Who could blame him ? A cookbook author on a 10-day , 10-city tour has to take along just about everything ! What I had in that thing was this : Pots . Pans . Bowls . Pastry board . Paper towels . Oil ( to spruce up food that has dried out under hot television lights ) . Ice packs ( to keep foods from developing ptomaine ) . Detergent and sponges ( to wash dishes in ladies ' rooms just in case the television studio `` kitchen sink '' is a fake -- which it usually is ) . And , of course , food . `` Break a leg , '' my publisher said , sending me off with a smile . I smiled back . I had no idea what was in store . `` Arrive 8 p.m. Monday , '' said my itinerary . `` XYZ TV station demonstration 7 a.m . Tuesday . '' My plane , in fact ( delayed due to weather ) , arrived at 1 a.m. At 6 a.m . I was in the bowels of the hotel whipping up a quick bastilla . At 7 a.m . I arrived at the television studio , food chest in tow . `` You must be the food act , '' said a grip as I lugged my one-ton ice chest across the studio floor . No one lifted a finger to help . `` Union rules , you know , '' said the grip , leading me to a fake -- and filthy -- `` kitchen counter '' set against a fake Chicago skyline that doubled as a news team 's desk . Then I had two minutes before it was time to be gorgeous and witty and put out a 10-course meal . It might have been easier had I not chosen a dish using filo . Most of the dough I had brought with me dried out after a few days on the road , and I ended up doing the entire demonstration substituting sheets of legal-size typewriter paper for the dough . `` Neat trick , '' said the television host . At least it kept the camera crew from devouring the props before show time . On another occasion , an entire meal for a morning show disappeared when my back was turned . We had to resort to close-up photographs from the book . But who 's complaining ? Every author has his road stories . The late Dione Lucas , a French chef and one of the first women to go on the road with a cookbook , told of carrying a fresh pig 's head that was leaking droplets of blood as she stepped off the New Haven Railroad . She was stopped by the police and her bag was confiscated . The policeman fainted when he opened the bag . She never did get her pig back . Missing ingredients have actually been known to kill books . One author promoting a book on a Los Angeles television show ran out of eggnog . She substituted colored water thickened with egg white . The host tasted it -- and spit it out -- before millions of viewers . That ended the interview -- and the book . To avoid these little problems , many publishers provide an assistant to do the shopping , cooking and chauffeuring for the visiting author . `` It 's important to have the day run smoothly , '' says Lisa Ekus , president of Lisa Ekus Public Relations , which specializes in food books . After all , sending an author on a tour is not cheap . A single day on the road can cost a publisher $ 1,000 for a novelist and about $ 1,500 for a cookbook author ( because of higher out-of-pocket expenses for food and materials ) . Nevertheless , Ekus estimates that touring by cookbook authors has quadrupled in the last five years . After all , sending an author on a tour is not cheap . A single day on the road can cost a publisher $ 1,000 for a novelist and about $ 1,500 for a cookbook author ( becuase of higher out-of-pocket expenses for food and materials ) . Nevertheless , Ekus estimates that touring by cookbook authors has quadrupled in the last five years . Not every author gets to tour : Publishers look for `` mediagenic '' personalities . `` An author has to be effervescent and an intelligent spokesperson who can answer interviewer 's questions articulately , '' says Stuart Applebaum , senior vice president of publicity and public relations for Bantam Doubleday Dell Publishing Group Inc . Adds Ekus : `` Some authors may be wonderful writers or cooks , but they are duds on the screen . '' But help is available -- even for duds , at a price : Ekus offers two-on-one media-training sessions to prepare food writers for television appearances at $ 2,000 a session . `` Most television studios want to see what they 're getting before they commit to having them on the show , '' says Ekus , who has trained Jasper White , author of `` Jasper White 's Cooking From New England '' ( Harper & Row ) ; Nicole Routhier , who authored `` Foods From Vietnam '' ( Stuart , Tabori & Chang ) , and Sally Schneider , author of `` Art of Low Calorie Cooking '' ( Stuart , Tabori & Chang ) . But some old pros do n't need Ekus ' help . Consider veteran Maida Heatter , author of several cookbooks . `` I do n't carry anything anymore , '' she says . While promoting `` Maida Heatter 's Book of Great American Desserts '' ( Alfred A. Knopf : $ 25 ) , Heatter carried only a single jar of chocolate sauce . `` All I need to do is heat it up and reuse it for the next interview . ''