BRITAIN 'S motorists could be made to pay for using congested roads under proposals being considered by the government . In the next few weeks , Mr Malcolm Rifkind , the transport secretary , will announce that he is to consider a pay-as-you-go charging system as part of a fundamental shift in approach to solving Britain 's growing traffic problems . Cars and lorries could be fitted with electronic devices to interact with roadside monitors , charging according to mileage , time of day and type of vehicle . This system , known as road pricing , is regarded by transport economists , the main opposition parties and a range of other bodies , as offering the most realistic long-term solution to Britain 's growing road congestion problems . Under Mrs Margaret Thatcher 's leadership the government rejected road pricing as an unnecessary and politically unacceptable infringement of motorists ' freedom . The re-think , initiated by Mr John Major since he became prime minister , has opened the way for more sympathetic consideration of the idea . Mr Rifkind is looking at road pricing as a way of dealing with traffic volumes , forecast by the Transport Department to rise by between 83 per cent and 142 per cent by the year 2025 . Mr Rifkind believes the Transport Department 's forecasts for traffic growth can not be accommodated with road building , and measures have to be introduced to deter motorists from driving , particularly in urban areas and the densely-populated south-east . While increased investment in the railway system could help , Mr Rifkind considers that British Rail 's small share of the passenger travel market - about 7 per cent of passenger miles - means this can form only part of the solution . He has therefore asked departmental officials to study the feasibility of rationing road space through a pricing system and to suggest ways in which it could be introduced . At present , the only country operating a road pricing system is Singapore , where motorists driving into the city at busy times have to buy permits and display them on their windscreens . Other densely populated countries such as the Netherlands are considering the introduction of electronic road pricing systems , and in the UK Cambridge is working on plans for a city scheme . Mr Rifkind 's acknowledgement that traffic growth can not be accommodated by road building could have wider implications for the Transport Department's construction programme . At present , the department 's forecasts are used to support its case for new roads . If it accepts that this growth can not materialise , its case for some schemes , particularly environmentally sensitive ones , may be weakened . Letters : Tackling traffic growth , Page 10