1990 AND early 1991 have seen monetary contraction in most of the world's main economies . Monetarists would argue that this also explains why it has been a period of recession in the US and UK , and of slowdown in most of the other big countries . Particularly significant has been the decline in the year-on-year rates of growth of US M2 , the country 's most closely watched index of broad money . The year-on-year rates of growth of broad money also fell sharply in the UK , although they have remained very high by any other country 's standards . Under the ruthless guidance of Mr Yasushi Mieno , governor of the Bank of Japan , the year-on-year rate of growth of Japan 's M2 plus certificates of deposit ( CDs ) has halved , accompanied by the stock market crash , whose effect appears in the rise in the yield on equities . France , too , has seen a slow-down in the growth of broad money since early 1990 and a more rapid slowing still in the growth of narrow money . For its part , Italy has avoided a decline in the growth rate of broad money , although the year-on-year growth rates of narrow money have fallen . The main exception to the general trends is Germany , not only because of the direct effects of economic and monetary union last July , when D-Mark monetary stocks jumped by about 15 per cent : driven along by unification , even the growth rates of the monetary stocks in west Germany did not fall in 1990 , as in other big countries , although they did not accelerate significantly either . Whether the monetary expansion that followed unification will prove inflationary is uncertain , depending as it does on economic behaviour in east Germany . But unification has already had an important effect on German monetary conditions and on convergence within the European Community , via the interest rate . As the chart shows , long-term rates of interest have converged among the four large economies in the EC . This matters because the German government has stated that interest rate convergence is one of the conditions for movement to economic and monetary union in the EC , arguing that it would also indicate convergence of long-term inflationary expectations . Yet the marked convergence that can be seen in the chart is a result of the virtue of the other three only to a modest degree , at least over the past five years . It is also a reflection of doubts about Germany , where the long-term nominal rate of interest has risen by 2 percentage points above its level in 1988 . Whether this increase reflects higher inflationary expectations or higher real interest rates within an imperfectly integrated global capital market , it has done far more for interest rate convergence than lower rates in the other countries . All this emerges from the third table in our new series of indicators for the six largest industrial countries , which follows the National Accounts ( April 8 1991 ) and Balance of Payments ( April 15 1991 ) . The table presents the most broadly watched monetary aggregates and interest rate series in each of these six countries . The narrow measures of money supply ( M0 and M1 ) include highly liquid , generally non-interest bearing assets , while the broader measures ( M2 , M3 and M4 ) include assets that are likely to be used as a means of saving as well . In the US the Federal Reserve has argued that the long-run growth of M2 should approximately equal the trend growth in output , if price stability is to be achieved . M2 has remained within its target range of 3-7 per cent in both 1989 and 1990 while the provisional target for 1991 has been reduced to 2 1/2 -6 1/2 per cent . Meanwhile , the Bank of Japan has announced a projection of 8 per cent growth for M2 plus CDs in the year to the first quarter of 1991 , a forecast that seems eminently reasonable . Abstracting from the one-off impact of German monetary union , the Bundesbank 's 1991 target for the growth of all-German M3 is 4-6 per cent . According to the Bundesbank 's own calculations ( not reported in the table ) growth of all-German M3 between the fourth quarter of 1990 and February 1991 , on an annualised basis , was 3.5 per cent . This is below the official target range , although it is expected to rise once more . Meanwhile , growth of all-German M1 between November 1990 and February 1991 was 6.1 per cent . For 1991 the table shows month-on-month growth rates for all-German money , starting with January 1991 over December 1990 . For EC member countries other than Germany the principal monetary indicator is the exchange rate against the D-Mark within the exchange rate mechanism of the European monetary system . In the case of the UK , for example , the Financial Statement and Budget Report released at the time of the March budget , states that 'interest rate decisions must now be set consistently with keeping sterling within its announced bands . ' But some countries have supplementary monetary targets . Like the Bundesbank , the Banque de France , has chosen M3 as its target indicator , its range being 5-7 per cent , marginally less expansive than the growth of 8.5 per cent between 1989 and 1990 . In the UK , by contrast , the extraordinarily rapid growth of broad money led the authorities to abandon it in the mid-1980s . The target is M0 , instead , which is almost entirely cash in circulation . The current aim , growth of 0-4 per cent in the financial year starting April 1991 , is fully consistent with recent performance .