MR MICHEL ROCARD leaves New Zealand today after a pilgrimage in which he apologised for the wrong done to New Zealand by France for the bombing of the Greenpeace vessel , Rainbow Warrior . On other matters he was far from conciliatory , however . He remained adamant that France would continue to test nuclear weapons in the Pacific , and told business and farming leaders that France would not be pushed faster than it wanted in lowering protective barriers for agricultural products . In a hectic three-day visit , the first by a European prime minister since Harold Macmillan in 1958 , Mr Rocard was seen to court unpopularity at home by his willingness to shoulder French responsibility for the Rainbow Warrior affair and later problems surrounding the captivity of the French agents responsible in the Pacific . Mr Rocard personally set up the friendship cultural exchange programme being funded by a Dollars 2m ( Pounds 1.1m ) donation from France as recommended by the United Nations tribunal which mediated in the dispute that ensued . Talks with Mr Jim Bolger , the New Zealand prime minister and other leaders were harmonious . Mr Rocard showed determination to strengthen French influence in the Pacific as a counter to Japan . Spokesmen said afterwards that New Zealand attempts to move Mr Rocard on the topic of nuclear testing got nowhere . He repeatedly emphasised that the tests posed no threat to the region , and France wished to maintain an independent nuclear deterrent . He said it was a 'weird idea that France should get rid of the one thing that kept war away from us ' . Mr Bolger said that New Zealand would much prefer France to carry out the tests at home in Europe . Most of Mr Rocard 's appearances were marked by anti-nuclear protests . He also spoke to a gathering of business leaders in which he sharply criticised the Cairns group of agricultural exporting nations , to which New Zealand belongs , as 'extreme ' in its calls for trade reform . He called for the Gatt negotiations to continue 'in relative silence ' to allow some form of settlement to be reached .