CS FIRST BOSTON , the New York-based investment banking group , suffered a Dollars 587m loss last year , according to its Swiss parent CS Holding . CS First Boston took an extraordinary loss of Dollars 428m on top of an operating loss of Dollars 159m . It had to set aside some Dollars 300m in special reserves because of the risk associated with bridge loans to several highly-leveraged companies . It had hoped to cover these loans with publicly-placed , high-yield debt , but was thwarted by the collapse of the US junk bond market . In November , CS First Boston was recapitalised with a Dollars 300m input from CSH and Dollars 15m from Metropolitan Life , the US insurance group . The Swiss holding company now has a 64.2 per cent capital stake and 73.5 per cent of the voting rights in CS First Boston , making it the first foreign institution to be a majority owner of a major US investment bank . CS First Boston managers own 22 per cent of the company , Metropolitan Life's stake is now 6 per cent , and 7.6 per cent is held by 11 other institutional investors . Last year 's restructuring at the US end involved the creation of a special purpose company , in which CSH has a 49 per cent interest , to carry the major bridge loan exposure . During the first quarter this year , one holding - First Brands - was sold , bringing in Dollars 93m which was used to reduce senior debt from Dollars 650m to Dollars 557m . Total revenue at CS First Boston fell from Dollars 1.4bn to Dollars 905m last year . The difference includes extraordinary reserves of Dollars 296m against the bridge loans , partly offset by an extraordinary gain from the sale of Clariden Bank , a Swiss subsidiary , to CSH . Mr Rudi Stalder , CS First Boston chief financial officer , said CS First Boston 's operating results only went into the red in the last quarter , when management were preoccupied with the urgent need to recapitalise the company . Competitors had tried to exploit the situation by approaches to both clients and company staff . Nevertheless , CS First Boston 's ability to maintain high rankings in practically all investment banking league tables showed that most clients had stayed loyal . Major rating agencies had reconfirmed CS First Boston 's standings after the restructuring . Long-term capitalisation now stood at Dollars 1.61bn against Dollars 1.78bn in 1989 , while the balance sheet was down from Dollars 46bn to Dollars 38bn , Mr Stalder said . CS First Boston had been obliged to set aside additional reserves of Dollars 116m to cover potential cash shortfalls from long-term commitments for now-unneeded office space . Results for the first quarter of 1991 had been very good .