With all the communications equipment on the market today , from carphones to satellite telex machines , it may seem curious that up to 75 per cent of calls never get through to the right person . Instead the frustrated caller is bombarded with the continuous ringing or engaged tone or ends up leaving a message that may never be answered . In the US , but not widely yet in Europe , a technology is being used which helps to eliminate this problem - voice messaging or voice mail , where recorded messages can be left on a central recording device to be picked up the recipient . Nigel Southon , general manager of voice messaging for British Telecom in the UK , equates voice messaging to a spoken memo - a way of leaving messages without sticking numerous bits of paper on someone 's desk . 'It 's for closed user groups in medium-sized or large companies who want to replace paper with voice . My paperwork has gone down by between a third to a half by using it , ' he says . Several surveys carried out by companies in the US demonstrate the cost advantages of voice messaging , says Laura Macias , market development manager with Octel , a US voice messaging equipment manufacturer . She cites the case of General Electric which concluded that the company could save Dollars 1,100 per year for each of its 60,000 employees by using voice messaging . 'Many companies experience payback on equipment in less than a year . ' One company that has pioneered the use of voice messaging , both in the US and Europe , is 3M , the materials group . Malcolm Wollaston , telecommunications manager for Europe , explains that in the UK 50 sales staff in the abrasives technology group were the first to use voice messaging , but now there are 400 3M users in the UK and this figure could soon rise to 1,000 . In the US 12,000 3M employees already use voice messaging . As well as improving internal communications , 3M sales people give clients their voice messaging numbers and personal identification number along with their ordinary phone numbers . By phoning the number and keying in the Pin on the phone touchpad , the client is prompted to leave a message requesting information , giving an order or demanding help . This information is digitised and stored on a computer hard disc . Wollaston emphasises the need for proper training for those with mailboxes , not just in the technology but in how to get the best business advantage out of the system . For example , sales staff are told that they must phone in to collect their messages - which are automatically played back to them - every two hours . This way customers can be confident that they will get a swift response to inquiries . For Wollaston , voice messaging is only one way to maintain communications with people on the road . As such competes directly with cellular phones and radiopagers , and he has calculated the comparative costs of the three . Despite the plummeting costs of cellular radio hardware , Wollaston estimates that the running costs for each phone user are about Pounds 700 a year , taking initial purchase , subscription charges and calls into consideration . Depending on the geographical area covered , radiopagers can cost between Pounds 200 and Pounds 700 to run as well . Voice messaging services cost 3M about Pounds 360 per person . Wollaston cites further advantages : A single bill is sent to the company - with carphones you get a bill for each phone . Management statistics can be compiled much more easily as a result . The number given can be a toll-free number if required , so there is no expense to the caller . This means that company sales people , say , can avoid the high call charges imposed by many hotels . However , Wollaston acknowledges that different communications means are appropriate for different users in different situations . Voice messaging is most useful where people need to communicate specific information , or where managers want to send out a single message to a number of employees ( the message can be duplicated electronically ) . And if the message needs to be sent on from one person 's mailbox to another , that can be done by pressing a few buttons . Anybody who has phoned a business in the US to be greeted by a recorded message has experienced the simplest manifestation of voice messaging : that of a corporate answering machine where unanswered phone calls via the office telephone system are routed to the voice messaging system . Southon reports increasing interest from companies whose staff are 'site mobile ' - managers in retail stores , hotels or restaurants who are rarely in their offices . Voice messaging is also proving useful for companies which operate across international boundaries and time zones . Glaxo , Britain 's largest pharmaceutical company , for example , uses voice messaging to enable employees in its subsidiary offices in the Mediterranean and Middle East to call into the UK and leave messages outside the traditional UK working hours . Voice messaging systems can also store messages and transmit them when off-peak phone rates are in operation . For small organisations such as the Technology Broker , a company with fewer than 10 employees who flit between the two main offices in California and London , voice messaging is one of the few satisfactory ways of doing business . Annie Brooking , managing director of the company , explains that she rents a mailbox on an American-based service where clients can leave messages for her . Then she rents further mailboxes for each of her larger clients so that she can leave messages for them . ' I have one client who I sometimes won't see for six months . But I speak to him every day , ' she says . For smaller companies , renting voice mailboxes from a service provider is the only option . Larger companies can opt to rent the service or buy their own voice messaging hardware to install alongside their corporate telephone exchange . In the UK 3M rents its service from British Telecom but is considering moving to an in-house machine to reduce costs . 'In the US it costs about Dollars 4 per user per month on an in-house system , ' reports Wollaston . In the US large companies often opt to use a combination of the two , buying equipment for their biggest offices and renting bureau services for their smaller regional offices . But in Europe it is only recently , with the liberalisation of telecommunications , the falling costs of hardware and the cultural acceptance of recorded messages that businesses have begun to accept voice messaging . European business exchange manufacturers such as Ericsson , GPT and Siemens are now set to compete in the voice messaging market with US manufacturers such as Octel , AT & T , Voice Mail Systems and Northern Telecom . One factor which may encourage further growth is an agreement of standards to enable voice messaging equipment from one maker to communicate with that from another . But although US companies took to voice messaging like ducks to water , they are only now realising some of the drawbacks . In the US hackers have begun to target voice messaging networks , some to gain commercial advantage . More sinister , says Adam Greenberg , editor of the voice processing newsletter of Probe Research , the US consultancy based in Cedar Knolls , New Jersey , which specialises in voice messaging , is the infiltration of company messaging systems by drug dealers . They set up their own mailboxes , with private Pin numbers , where they leave details of drug availability and prices . Frequently they use networks with toll-free numbers - so the company not only unwittingly promotes the sale of drugs , but pays for the privilege as well .