WHILE European information technology companies continue to experience difficulties , their Japanese counterparts are patiently expanding their presence on the Continent and in the UK . Although Fujitsu 's acquisition last year of ICL garnered the most headlines , scores of Japanese companies are developing production facilities , creating sales networks and searching for potential joint venture partners in the region . 'We very much respect the marketing and software capabilities of European firms , especially their network architecture , ' says Mr Hideichi Nose , vice-president for European operations at NEC . Most observers believe that except for sales channels and some software , most European companies have little to offer their Japanese rivals besides political cover . 'European information technology companies rank very low on the list of who the Japanese fear , ' says Mr David Benda , an analyst at Barclays de Zoete Wedd ( Asia ) in Tokyo . 'The Japanese want to have a presence in Europe . But what can they get by acquiring a company ? Not much , except for distribution , ' he adds . Japanese companies prefer to stay away from high-profile acquisitions , even friendly ones such as ICL . Instead , most are concentrating on establishing their own production and sales networks , preferably in the form of joint ventures . 'We have to be certain that investments in fields like semiconductors are welcome , ' says Mr Taizo Nishimuro , general manager for overseas operations at Toshiba . 'It might be easier to go it 100 per cent alone or to buy out an existing firm , but it does n't guarantee us that those actions will be welcomed by the community . ' Most observers believe Toshiba will not be alone in co-operating with its European competitors . Olivetti may be forced to strengthen ties with various Japanese companies , including Hitachi which provides it with hardware on an OEM basis . Siemens sells Fujitsu mainframes and supercomputers , licenses Drams from Toshiba , and given its distribution and service networks , is a natural match for a Japanese partner . Meanwhile , Bull 's increasing problems may force it to fully embrace NEC , which now provides the French company with mainframes . 'Bull has to figure out what it 's going to cut , what it 's going to keep , and what it 's going to source out , ' says Mr Steve Myers , analyst at Jardine Fleming ( Securities ) in Tokyo . 'It 's entirely conceivable , but not certain , that Bull will become dependent on NEC hardware and choose to add value through software , ' he says . Such arrangements - Japanese hardware and customised local software - are expected to increase as more production becomes application specific . Fujitsu has formed joint ventures with Quotient of the UK and the British subsidiary of McDonnell Douglas , to develop software for the banking and CAD/CAM industries respectively . Toshiba is developing CMOS chips with SGS Thomson Microelectronics of Holland , while other Japanese producers are sourcing out much of their local software and design work . Moreover , even with higher capital costs and mounting overcapacity in the memory chip market , Japanese companies have not abandoned direct investment . NEC plans to begin construction of a new computer production facility in Germany and has just completed upgrading its plant in Scotland to produce four megabit Drams . Fujitsu will soon finish a new production facility in Durham in northern England to produce similar chips . 'Investment has slowed , ' admits Mr Mike Jeremy , an analyst at Baring Securities ( Japan ) . 'But not as much as had been expected . ' Many analysts argue that one of the attractions of western Europe is its position as a springboard for eastern European market . Over 60 per cent of Japanese products sold in eastern Europe are shipped from Japanese subsidiaries in the EC . 'Naturally , because of its proximity and its similar culture we do feel entering eastern Europe is easier through the west , especially Germany , ' says Mr Nishimuro . As personal incomes grow in the former Comecon states , the market will shift from large-scale infrastructure projects ( a relative European strength ) to consumer-driven purchases sure to favour the Japanese , say most analysts . Moreover , some Japanese companies are attracted by the East 's low wages and relatively well-educated workforce . Such allures may lead many Japanese companies to shift much of their assembly operations to the east , and to concentrate on more value-added production in the West . 'To the extent you put semiconductor production into western Europe , board stuffing can then be done where it 's cheapest , ' says Mr Myers . Political uncertainties remain the greatest fear among senior executives in Tokyo . Fujitsu , in particular , is wary of projecting a high-profile image . 'ICL is a different company , ' says Mr Yuri Momomoto , of Fujitsu . 'They have their own plans which we do n't know about . ' Regardless , except for political sensitivities , and perhaps being privy to the setting of standards , most Japanese companies seem unconcerned with being shut out of European research consortia , largely because Japanese companies have much more to contribute than the Europeans themselves . 'It does n't make sense to keep out the Japanese , ' says Mr Jeremy . 'The Europeans will lose the opportunity to monitor them . It 's a two-way street . It 's no more Machiavellian than that . ' In addition , many argue that dictates from Brussels may ultimately backfire . A 1990 decision by the European Commission setting minimum prices for Japanese chips allegedly being dumped in Europe may help Japanese producers beset by falling prices in the same way a similar 1985 US decree ( now expired ) rescued a Japanese chip industry drowning in its own overcapacity . Moreover , adds Mr Benda , as Europe continues to insist that more products be manufactured locally , more Japanese companies will come , posing a further threat to European companies . Others argue , however , that even if Japanese companies were to show that they are 'politically correct ' by participating in projects such as the research consortia , it is doubtful that they would be willing to share any of their most advanced technology - something they have never done in the past . 'There must be another mechanism by which the Japanese are forced to share some of their technology , ' says a Tokyo-based industry observer . 'If the Europeans do n't band together and try to do something then they may as well throw in the towel . '