Sir , I have rather more confidence than Richard Tomkins ( 'Pile-up in the great car economy ' , April 9 ) that the government 's road improvement programme will reduce traffic congestion . While it is true that total route mileage will increase by about 2 per cent , the improvement programme concentrates on providing extra capacity by widening rather than lengthening the existing inter-urban road network . Under the government 's proposals for England , the capacity of the trunk road network , which carries one-third of all traffic and two-thirds of goods traffic , will grow by about 45 per cent . This will involve improvement of about one-third of the existing network estimated to be incapable of coping with forecast traffic at the turn of the century . The remaining two-thirds of the trunk road system is estimated to have adequate capacity to meet future demand to beyond the turn of the century . Provided the programme is fully implemented , we can meet inter-urban traffic demand for the foreseeable future . Mr Tomkins ' analysis becomes far more relevant in urban areas where increases in capacity will be minimal but at the same time traffic growth in those areas will be far lower . Nevertheless urban problems could be eased if through traffic could be removed from towns and villages on to bypasses . Having removed through traffic from towns and villages , attention can be turned to the local traffic . But it should not be assumed that it can simply be catered for on an improved public transport system . Evidence from Britain and western Europe shows that previous improvements in public transport have mainly benefited existing users who find themselves with a more convenient service . Those improvements have done little to encourage drivers to leave their car at home . It may well then be necessary to use a stick , perhaps road pricing , to encourage more use of public transport in such areas . But advocates of traffic restraint should be aware of a recent study in Stockholm which concluded that the imposition of road pricing would result in an 8 per cent reduction in city centre retail trade . How many towns and cities would pay that price to reduce their traffic congestion ? Richard Diment , deputy director , British Road Federation , Pillar House , 194-202 Old Kent Road , SE1