SENATOR Lloyd Bentsen 's pronouncement this week that Japanese semiconductor processing equipment companies are withholding their latest technology from US chip makers highlights US fears of growing dependence on Japanese suppliers of critical technologies . Such fears give political ammunition to the US semiconductor industry and its Washington supporters . Senator Bentsen , Senate Finance Committee chairman , is among the US chip industry 's most powerful political allies . That US chip makers depend increasingly on Japanese suppliers for production tools is hardly news . Japanese companies dominate several key segments of the semiconductor equipment market . The US wafer processing equipment industry suffered loss of market share in the 1980s , according to a national security assessment released by the Commerce Department 's Bureau of Export Administration last week . This says the US chip production equipment industry 'is vital to the success of semiconductor manufacturing ' . The health of US equipment companies 'affects viability of the semiconductor industry ' , which in turn is crucial for enhancing industrial capabilities , and as a source of technical military advantage . Privately , US semiconductor executives complain they can not get advanced equipment from Japan until long after their Japanese competitors . But evidence to support US industry charges that Japanese equipment makers deliberately delay shipments has , until now , been scant . Senator Bentsen claims that a General Accounting Office ( GAO ) investigation has uncovered several cases of alleged delays or refusals to ship critical Japanese equipment to US companies . In other cases , he says , US chip makers have had to pay prices 20-30 per cent higher than their Japanese competitors to obtain the latest equipment . GAO investigators had trouble getting US chip executives to state their problems , one industry expert said . 'US executives are afraid to criticise Japanese equipment companies . They fear reprisals . ' With publication by Senator Bentsen of a list of seven Japanese companies alleged to have deliberately withheld technology from US chip makers , the industry 's code of silence is breaking down . Advanced Micro Devices said this week it could not obtain a piece of equipment it knew its Japanese partner was using in a US production facility . 'We agree with the Senator's premise that the Japanese do hold back the latest equipment from us , ' said Mr James Owens Jr , vice-president of world-wide wafer fabrication technology at National Semiconductor . Japanese responses cite lack of US service and support arrangements , or delays in translating manuals . 'These are just excuses , ' the industry expert says . Fears of dependence on foreign tool suppliers have fuelled US chip industry support for Sematech , the government-funded consortium , whose mission has become to revitalise the US semiconductor equipment and materials industry . The GAO report , for release this summer , is likely to stress the need for a strong domestic chip equipment industry . Publication could coincide with calls to renew Defence Department funding for Sematech beyond its five-year charter . Senator Bentsen 's preview seems timed to boost pressure on Japan to open its chip market further . US and Japanese trade officials were due to resume talks yesterday to seek a new chip trade pact . South Korea is seeking to build an equipment industry able to meet half its semiconductor industry needs by the year 2000 . Japanese dependence on US equipment makers led it to create its own chip production equipment industry .