A MODEST increase in world iron ore consumption is expected next year after a difficult 1992 , which has been marked by lower prices , weaker demand , high investments and declining trade . Government and industry representatives from 30 countries who met last week in Geneva under the auspices of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development , agreed that 'the worst has already passed ' for the industry in the short term . Long-term prospects were also brighter , with the International Iron and Steel Institute predicting an overall increase in steel consumption to the year 2000 . The institute expects a 1.5 per cent rise in steel demand in 1993 , which the experts believe will translate into an increase in demand for iron ore of the order of 1 per cent . This compares with a drop in world consumption of 4 per cent in 1991 to 937m tonnes and a further fall in 1992 . Despite higher demand , however , the high level of stocks and very low scrap prices will continue to put downward pressure on iron ore prices next year . The 1992 slowdown has reflected recession in the big industrialised countries , especially Japan and Germany , the two leading iron ore importers . Crude steel production in the first nine months of 1992 was down 13 per cent in Japan and 2 per cent in Germany compared with the corresponding period of 1991 . However , the big fiscal expansion package announced by the Japanese government last summer is expected to boost steel output from early next year . Other Asian markets are growing strongly , especially China where crude steel production rose by an annualised 14 per cent in the first nine months of this year . Steel production has also been rising in the US and Latin America . The main black spot remains eastern Europe where crude steel production fell by an annual 16 per cent in January-September 1992 and little improvement is expected in the near term . Iron ore production in the region is almost entirely concentrated in the former Soviet Union , with Russia and Ukraine accounting for nearly 95 per cent of output . Despite a drop of 16 per cent from 1990 , the former Soviet republics still produced 199m tonnes of iron ore in 1991 , more than 20 per cent of the world total . After the former Soviet Union , China , Brazil and Australia are the leading iron ore producers , while Brazil and Australia are by far the biggest exporters .