Only four months to go . During the Wigmore Hall 's year-long closure various of the other musical venues in London have been putting on recitals , but none has been able to offer the combination of intimate acoustics and friendly atmosphere which makes that hall so precious . From time to time the Barbican endeavours to promote itself again as a recital hall and the past year has been a clear opportunity . The sound is perhaps less poor for chamber-music than one might have feared , as the acoustic gains in clarity as the number of players gets smaller . But nothing can stop the hall looking and sounding empty when there is only a handful of people on stage . For the celebrity recital by the Takacs Quartet Barbican last Wednesday no attempt was made to disguise the chilliness of the setting . The players sat centre-stage , surrounded by a vast expanse of deserted platform . The upper tiers of the auditorium looked to have been closed off . At quiet moments the sound became unhelpfully distant and it was fortunate that so fine a group was playing , as the audience was compelled to sit in silence . This is a quartet with the ability to make its presence felt in any hall . The players ' tone is well matched , their style unexaggerated . Warmth and lyricism are their hallmarks , although just occasionally there was a seasoning of their native Hungarian paprika in Bartok 's First Quartet and also the scherzo of Haydn 's B Flat Quartet , Op . 76 No . 4 , where the vigorous stamping rhythm was taken up rather noisily by the leader 's left foot . In their performance of Schubert 's 'Death and the Maiden ' Quartet neurosis was held at bay . Where the Lindsay Quartet seizes the music by the throat , or the Amadeus was wiry and tensile , the Takacs still find time to shape broad lyrical phrases ( the elegiac opening of the slow movement was coloured with particular sensitivity ) . The players will be hosting their own festival at the Wigmore Hall in 1994 , so they clearly recognise where their true London home lies . A word of recommendation , too , for the Beethoven Trio , who gave the first of three recitals at the Purcell Room on Friday . Each of these programmes features a new work by an Austrian composer together with Mozart and Beethoven trios , for which the players are winning an increasing reputation at home and abroad . To judge from the standard of performance in this first recital there is no reason to question those high opinions . The Beethoven Trio is a meeting of three equal musicians , less dominated by the pianist than is often the case in more starry ensembles , a trio of young and fresh interpreters , able to build long paragraphs of music into statements of some depth and import . The new work on this occasion was Gerhard Schedl 's Second Piano Trio , subtitled 'Lamento ' , which takes the music of the two Armed Men from Mozart 's Die Zauberflote and sets isolated phrases from it afloat in a sea of vaguely expressionist sounds : not a piece of strong individual merit , although at 10 minutes it did not outstay its welcome . The third and final recital , with a new work by Thomas Pernes , follows on Friday . * * * In a Purcell Room agreeably tarted up with paintings from the Arts Council collection , including Gillian Eyres 's eye-catching 'Spica ' and a yellow and blob-red Caulfield , the English tenor Adrian Thompson and pianist Iain Burnside gave a recital on Thursday , fifth in a song series which would normally be staged , one presumes , in the Wigmore Hall . Certainly the Wigmore acoustics would have been more accommodating to Mr Thompson 's searingly powerful instrument . He makes a clarion sound which is apt to go frantic with decibels in upper register climaxes and produce a cuttingly painful effect in the confinement of the Purcell Room , which oddly seems to stop the voice dead without muting it . Passionate and in many ways persuasive , Mr Thompson 's recital problem was sheer vocal bulk . From the start he was overwhelming his pianist as well as flattening his listeners in a Schubert group , though the passionate , storm-lashed Der Schiffer ( The Boatman ) positively benefited from the ferocious despatch . Among a selection of Hugo Wolf 's Morike settings , Der Tambour , a drummer boy 's fantasy of food , and Storchenbotschaft ( Stork-tidings ) , with its bitonal piano part figuring the shepherd 's creaky hut ( and anticipating the methods of Britten ) , made a vivid impression . An eine Aolsharfe ( To an Aeolian Harp ) received a strong , solemn delivery . I found the five Gerald Finzi songs after the interval dullish , and the four Samuel Barber 's not much less so : Sure on this Shining Night sets words by James Agee but is n't a patch on Knoxville . Mr Thompson came on in chef's togs for Leonard Bernstein 's Faure send-up , La bonne cuisine , the four song-texts being French recipes . The 33-year old Russian conductor Yakov Kreizberg ( he emigrated to the USA in 1976 ) made his London debut on Sunday night with the Philharmonia Orchestra at the Royal Festival Hall in an all-Russian programme . It was not an exceptionally interesting programme , but Kreizberg made it uncommonly gripping and the orchestra 's playing was of the highest stylishness throughout . The Polonaise from Tchaikovsky 's opera Eugene Onegin was a brief but cracking opener and its brilliant bluster was no sooner in our ears than forcibly contradicted by the bleak depression of Shostakovich 's second cello concerto , Op . 126 , a late work written for Rostropovich in 1966 between the thirteenth and fourteenth symphonies . Our soloist was the American Lynn Harrell ( in the news because of his appointment as next principal of the Royal Academy of Music ) , and no more searching or finely shaped interpretation could have been asked for . Harrell 's tone is as clear as it is expressive , as minutely governed as it is boldly ( and with seeming effortlessness ) projected . Shostakovich's invention is not perhaps of the most distinguished in this work , which is just a very good performance 'on the Shostakovich ' ; but Harrell read in a marvellous intensity everywhere and the orchestra answered Kreizberg's evident commitment with a high-tension accompaniment notable for individual excellences ( the sturdy peculiar horn calls at the end of the first movement , the split-second demented xylophone interjections of the scherzo ) as well as formidable group cohesiveness . Kreizberg cuts an impressive figure on the podium : unflamboyant but intense , dapper but keenly effectual . His account of Rakhmaninov 's second symphony was beautiful , profoundly persuasive ( the work can easily become a romantic thrash ) and , in its slow movement , quite overwhelming . The string textures of the slow introduction were built up with glistening precision , and brass layers superadded with a disciplined ear for balance . The performance of the scherzo was masterly ; one blessed Kreizberg for the tiny touches of violin portamento . Michael Whight 's quiet , poised clarinet solo in the spacious Adagio took our breath away , if not his ; and the movement went its noble way 'among the deepening shades ' .