FIVE times as many people hang up when they phone a friend and get an answering machine , than when a business call is answered by a machine , according to a recent survey carried out by Systems Reliability , a UK telecoms company . Despite their antipathy to answering machines , more than two thirds of the sample said they owned one . The latest models offer solid-state recording , which means callers ' messages are recorded directly onto a chip instead of a tape . There are no moving parts to break down and there is no delay ( for the owner 's greeting to be rewound ) after a caller has left a message . However , solid-state machines are not cheap . Audioline sells one for Pounds 79.99 . An equivalent machine without solid state costs Pounds 20 less . At the top of the range , BT 's Falcon II machine includes a handset , hands-free talking and solid-state outgoing message for Pounds 170 . BT also sells some combined telephone and answering machines with two-way record , which enable conversations to be recorded . But the most basic machine from UK electrical retailer Dixons costs less than Pounds 30 , and it is not unusual to find built-in answering machines on personal facsimile machines and cordless phones . Although 75 per cent of calls fail to reach their target , answering machines are still fairly rare in the European business environment . This is also true of voice messaging , the corporate equivalent . At their simplest , voice mail systems allow callers to leave messages . By dialing the appropriate voice mailbox number ( and a code ) , users can play them back . But most voice messaging systems can do much more . For example , once a caller has left a message , it can be forwarded from the user to a colleague , with instructions attached such as : 'Please sort out this customer 's problem and get back to me . ' Voice messaging systems have taken off in the US , partly because the touch-tone phones ( needed to operate them ) are in wider use . But acceptance has been slow in the UK and continental Europe . The involvement of the UK cellular phone operators has started to change the picture . Cellnet and Vodafone , the two main UK service providers have both launched 24-hour voice messaging services . These record all messages left when the mobile phone is switched off and then alert the user when the phone is back on . As well as being a big moneyspinner , they have helped to raise the profile of voice mail . As a result , research company BIS Mackintosh will shortly be revising upwards its public voice messaging forecasts . It originally forecast UK network revenues of Dollars 121.93m for public messaging services this year and Dollars 779.91m in 1996 . Apart from the cellular operators , leading players in the public voice mail market include Mercury and BT . BT also has a voice mail service for residential users on trial . In-house ( or premises-based ) voice mail systems offer similar features to public services . But they involve the one-off purchase of equipment , costing in the region of Pounds 10,000 for a 100 users . Public services , on the other hand , are pay-as-you-go . Most of the premises-based voice mail-voice processing systems available in Europe are based on North American products . These were pioneered by companies such as Octel ( sold by Hewlett Packard in the UK ) , AT & T , VMX ( sold by Mercury in the UK ) , Northern Telecom and Centigram . There are three main types of voice system : voice messaging , audiotex and voice processing . Audiotex is used for 0898 recorded information , such as racing results , weather information or airline flight times . Some systems can insert live information , such as the results of the latest racing fixture , into recorded information . Voice processing ( or interactive voice response ) is the type of technology used in telephone-based home banking systems . It might , for example , prompt the user to 'press one to order a cheque book , press two for your bank balance ' . In essence , these systems link a voice interface to a computer database . They allow customers to input and retrieve information using a touch-tone phone . The more advanced systems use speech recognition . Because of limitations in the technology , many use voice synthesis to play back the customer 's message for checking . One system , sold by US-based Syntellect , can recognise different languages . There is an increasing amount of overlap between the different voice technologies . For example , parts of British Rail are using Systems Reliability 's Orbi-Link Network for both voice mail ( to notify engineers of faults ) and voice processing ( to order parts and compile statistics on repair times ) . The system can also be integrated with local area network-based electronic mail , allowing users to add voice notes to text messages . However , the main driver in the premises-based voice systems market is integration with fax , according to Amanda Jobbins of BIS Mackintosh . This enables a customer to phone a supplier , select a product and provide a fax number to which a price-list can be sent automatically . And all without human intervention on the part of the supplier . The day might come when customers hang up if they get a human on the line .