CHINA 'S willingness to experiment with new means of raising foreign capital took another step forward yesterday when China Merchants , the large shipping , industrial , finance and tourism concern owned by the Chinese central government , went to the Hong Kong stock market seeking HKDollars 92m . In the first such invitation of its kind , China Merchants is offering the investing public a chance to buy into a mainland manufacturer of marine and industrial paints . It will issue 61.25m shares in Hai Hong Holdings ( 25 per cent of the company 's capital ) at HKDollars 1.50 a share . At the issue launch yesterday , Mr Jiang Bo , China Merchants ' managing director , said that if the issue proved successful then the company would consider using Hai Hong as a vehicle to float other China Merchants assets . Mr Jiang also hinted at a possible listing in London for China Merchants' Houlder Insurance Brokers ( HIB ) . He said it had the 'financial conditions' for listing and that there should be no problem with such a move . HIB was acquired in 1987 and had revenues in 1990 of Pounds 11.4m ( Dollars 21.09m ) . The decision to float a subsidiary in Hong Kong is a significant development for China Merchants , which is conservatively managed and secretive . It also indicates a growing acceptance in Beijing for economic reform . Analysts expected the issue to meet with widespread investor interest . The issue had novelty value and investors have demonstrated their hunger to own mainland assets , they said . China Merchants is one of the 'four heavenly sisters ' or old mainland companies in Hong Kong . It is owned by the Ministry of Communications in Beijing . Mr Jiang said the float had been under consideration for the past year . He said Hai Hong was chosen because it has a good track record and that the outlook for the paints industry in China was bright . There were also few difficulties in restating the company 's accounts to conform to western standards . Advisers to the company said this float represented an experiment for China Merchants . A relatively simple , single product company had been chosen for the float . They said , however , that Hai Hong would develop into China Merchants ' listed Hong Kong company . Much like Citic Pacific , the locally-listed vehicle for Beijing 's China International Trust and Investment Company , Hai Hong may well end up owning stakes in China Merchants ' extensive interests , they added . 'They are just beginning to realise that you do not need to own 100 per cent of something to control it , ' said one adviser .