August 18 : 1991 : Coup leaders hold President Mikhail Gorbachev captive in Crimean dacha August 19 : Coup leaders declare state of emergency August 21 : Coup collapses . Gorbachev returns to Moscow August 22 : Russian President Yeltsin suspends activities of Russian Communist Party in Gorbachev 's presence September 2 : Gorbachev and republican presidents agree to turn Soviet Union into confederation October 28 : Yeltsin announces radical economic and political reform programme at Congress of Russian People 's Deputies November 11 : Yeltsin appoints Gennady Burbulls , Yegor Gaidar and Alexander Shokhin deputy prime ministers in new reform cabinet December 8 : Leaders of Russia , Ukraine and Belorussia create Commonwealth of Independent States . Eight more states join four days later December 25 : Mikhail Gorbachev resigns as first and last President of the USSR December 31 : Soviet Union ceases to exist January 2 , 1992 : Most Russian prices deregulated January 31 : Yeltsin proposes sharp cut in Russian nuclear warheads at UN General Assembly March 21 : Majority in Russian autonomous republic of Tatarstan votes in referendum for independence from Russia April 6-7 : Russia and Ukraine exchange threats over Black Sea Fleet April 6-12 : Russian Congress of People 's Deputies denounces government , which offers to resign . Yeltsin promises to moderate reforms May 30 : Russian cabinet reshuffle brings in industrial lobby representatives July 8 : Group of Seven announces dollars 1bn in IMF funding for Russia . Yeltsin asks G7 for delay in debt repayments August 3 : Russia and Ukraine agree to postpone carve-up of Black Sea Fleet until 1995 THE NEW POLITICAL LINE-UP : The coup destroyed the Communist Party . But it has not stimulated the growth of other strong , independent parties . The parties in Russia are weak , usually dependent on one or a handful of political personalities . The most powerful political force at present is the Civic Union , composed of three parties built round prominent individuals ; Free Russia ( formerly Communists for Democracy ) , created by Vice President Alexander Rutskoi ; Obnovlenie ( `` Renewal '' ) headed by Mr Arkady Volsky , chairman of the Russian Union of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs ; and the Democratic Party , headed by Mr Nikolai Travkin , who claims the largest membership , of about 50,000 . Their motto : reforms , with a strong central power . In the Russian parliament , factions dominate . They range from the Democratic Russia faction ( liberal democratic ) through the Industrial and Agricultural Union ( corporatists ) to the Rossiya ( nationalist ) . During the Congress of People 's Deputies in April , pro- and anti- government sides were reasonably well-balanced . Now , a majority is anti-government . The political parties cover the same spectrum . Democratic Russia , which was an umbrella for a number of groups and parties , is hopelessly split : its radical liberal wing opposes the government from the so-called 'left ' , while constituent members like the Constitutional Democrats and Christian Democrats have left to join the nationalists . On the old left are a clutch of neo-communist parties - including the Bolshevik Party , headed by Mrs Nina Andreeva , and the Socialist Labour Party , headed by Mr Roy Medvedev .