BURMA 'S military government plans to accelerate its economic reforms to attract foreign investment and strengthen the fledgling private sector , according to Brig-Gen David Abel , the finance and planning minister . He acknowledged , however , that impoverished Burma 's economic growth would be curtailed by the refusal of foreign donors to provide aid and by the deadlock in Burma 's negotiations with the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund . The ruling State Law and Order Restoration Council ( Slorc ) has announced a stream of economic and political reforms in the past few months , including a privatisation programme , the easing of restrictions on tourists and journalists , and the lifting of a night curfew . But many foreign investors remain sceptical , and western governments are withholding aid because of the Slorc 's dismal human rights record and the continued detention of Ms Aung San Suu Kyi , the opposition leader who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1991 . 'Deregulation will be set at a faster pace , ' Gen Abel told the Financial Times in an interview . He said that the 1988 switch from a centrally planned to a free market economy had already taken root and that the private sector now accounted for half of the country 's exports . 'There are a lot of difficulties , ' he acknowledged , 'and we have to minimise these problems . That will take some time , say two or three years , to get it on a much firmer base . ' Such difficulties include the reluctance of newly legalised traders to pay border tariffs after decades of smuggling from China and Thailand , and the government 's fear that an outright devaluation of the kyat - Burma's currency which trades on the black market at a 20th of its official value - would fuel inflation and urban unrest . A handful of foreign companies , including Pepsi-Cola , have recently made small investments in Burma , but other potential investors are deterred by the overvalued currency , government red tape and the fear of further political instability . Asked about the difficulties foreign companies have in repatriating profits , he said they were entitled to do so under the law if the profits were proven , but complained : 'They operate on the black market rates and they want to repatriate at the official rates . ' Gen Abel said that Burma , as a mainly agricultural country , was less vulnerable to the worst effects of rapid economic reform than industrialised eastern Europe . But he made clear that the Slorc wanted a slower pace of structural adjustment than the IMF or the World Bank were prepared to support in the event of funds being made available . ' I think we 're at a deadlock , ' he said . 'Structural adjustments on currency would have to be done with great care and caution . They should offer us a safety net or cushion so the adjustments can be done properly . ' Gen Abel complained that the US refusal to renew a bilateral textile agreement meant that textile companies in Burma , which include South Korean and Hong Kong joint ventures , were operating below capacity , but he said the withholding of foreign aid would achieve nothing except slower economic growth .