THE House of Commons faces the prospect today of the first contested election for its Speaker , who presides over Commons proceedings , for more than 40 years , as it became clear that Miss Betty Boothroyd , Labour's candidate , will be proposed by Mr John Biffen , a former Tory cabinet minister . The arrangements when MPs meet this afternoon , under the chairmanship of Sir Edward Heath , the 'father of the House ' - the MP with the longest continuous service - may tax even those who remember the last contest in 1951 . Then there were only two candidates , while this time there may be four Tory candidates as well as Miss Boothroyd . Many Tories believe that if the Tory field is split , Miss Boothroyd is certain to win , possibly leading some Tories who favour other candidates to support the first Conservative proposed . As a result , some Tories believe there should be a change in the rules set out in Erskine May , Westminster 's procedural 'bible ' , to make the contest less dependent on the first nomination . Erskine May says that once one candidate has been proposed and seconded , then the debate proceeds to a vote only if another candidate is put forward in an amendment . Whether the original or alternative candidate wins further candidates can then be put forward in a series of 'knockout ' votes , in each of which MPs choose between two . The proposed change , which stands little chance of being accepted , would mean that the first vote is simply on whether Miss Boothroyd should be Speaker . Only if she were rejected would the Tory vote have to be divided between individual candidates . The process of successive divisions is so drawn-out that in the event MPs may not wish to follow such a procedure through to the end , and may settle on one candidate at an early stage if he or she seems likely to prevail overall . In an uncontested election , the proposer and seconder of the Speaker conventionally come from opposite sides of the Commons , but there is some doubt about which of the Tory candidates would get cross-party backing if Miss Boothroyd is in the running . Miss Boothroyd 's supporters say she has the support of up to 15 Tory MPs . The Speakership has conventionally been in the gift of the largest party , but the question is one MPs can decide for themselves and there is no 'party line ' .