TAIWAN 'S LOW-COST manufacturers are being forced to relocate overseas , as rising wages , high land prices and a strong Taiwan dollar decrease competitiveness and eat into profit margins . 'For the price of a factory worker in Taiwan , we can afford to employ 10 workers in China and 12 workers in Indonesia to do exactly the same job , ' says Mr Frank Kung , general secretary of Taiwan 's Footwear Manufacturers' Association Before 1987 most overseas investment went to the US , one of Taiwan 's closest trading partners . Since 1988 , however , the emphasis has turned to south east Asian countries offering plentiful cheap land and labour . According to government figures , Taiwanese companies have invested about Dollars 2.1bn in Asia since 1989 . By July 1992 , the Taiwan government had approved a total of Dollars 900m for Malaysia , Dollars 240m for the Philippines , Dollars 278m for Indonesia and Dollars 358m for Thailand . These figures do not include China where Taiwanese companies have invested , often illegally , since 1987 . Although estimates vary , probably more than Dollars 3bn has now flowed into the mainland . Together with other Asian investment , this makes Taiwan probably the largest Asian investor in the region after Japan . Last year Taiwan was the biggest foreign investor in Malaysia and Indonesia , investing a total of Dollars 602m in textiles , electronic and consumer goods and footwear . Poorer countries in the region have shown their willingness to encourage foreign investors . Vietnam has liberalised its rules on foreign investment since the late 1980s and Taiwanese companies have been quick to take advantage . By July this year , Taiwanese investment into Vietnam had reached Dollars 775m , more than any other country . Most of the projects were in chemicals , textiles , bamboo and wood products and food processing . Taiwan 's government actively encourages investment overseas , since cash can buy Taiwan the status and recognition it lacks in the diplomatic world . Indonesia , the Philippines and Singapore , have all signed investment guarantee agreements with Taiwan , and another is being negotiated with Vietnam , even though none of these countries recognises Taiwan politically . In an attempt to spread investment more evenly in the region , Taiwan's government has been plugging Vietnam as a viable , low-cost location . Direct flights between Taiwan and Vietnam were started in August , and the Kuomintang ( KMT ) 's Central Trade Development Corporation , along with a subsidiary , has committed Dollars 450m to develop an export-processing zone and surrounding infrastructure , near Ho Chi Minh City . However , there are now signs Taiwan 's investments in south east Asia may have peaked , as investment into China has accelerated . This 'mainland fever ' is mainly due to a cheap investment environment and common language and cultural ties . China 's new commitment to economic reform , signalled earlier this year , has also persuaded businessmen to push ahead with projects which were on hold . Most investment is in low-cost manufacturing and processing industries such as garments and electrical goods for export . Although the Taiwanese started by investing in the more open economies of Guangdong and Fujian , they are now going further afield and have even started targeting China 's domestic market . The government is increasingly concerned about the rate of investment in China , fearing vulnerability to political and economic changes on the mainland . China is also perceived as a fast-emerging competitor in the very industries that Taiwan is moving across the Strait . The government has therefore tried to prevent heavy and high technology industries from investing in China . However , many observers think the recent trend for larger Taiwan companies to start looking at the mainland market will only continue .