THE BATTLE for dominance in the market for washing-up liquid has produced one of the subtlest though most significant brand-name shifts this year . Procter & Gamble has decided to abandon its market-leading Fairy Liquid brand name and call its new washing-up liquid Fairy Excel . The change is small - designed to retain a successful brand name that first appeared in the shops 32 years ago - but there is a lot at stake . P & G was the biggest-spending television advertiser in Europe last year . The trade periodical Euromarketing says P & G spent Dollars 486m promoting 11 large brands in the European Community 's six biggest markets . In the UK alone , P & G spent an estimated Pounds 70.5m on advertising last year - Pounds 10m of it on Fairy Liquid , which had UK sales of Pounds 61m . The Fairy Liquid brand is sold in 10 countries , from Finland to Saudi Arabia -Fairy Excel has already been launched in Germany . P & G , a marketing-driven giant and one of the most secretive of multinationals , has achieved a dominating 42 per cent share of the UK market with Fairy Liquid . Two years ago P & G 's rival , Lever Brothers , piggy-backed on Persil , its successful washing powder brand , launching a new washing-up detergent , Persil Liquid . Lever spent an estimated Pounds 4m on television advertising for the new brand in its first five months . But according to marketing industry estimates Persil Liquid has taken no more than an 18 per cent market share . P & G is spending about 16p on advertising for every Pounds 1 in sales while Lever Brothers is spending at almost twice that rate . So if Fairy Liquid remains the first-choice brand for those who do not have a dishwasher , why fiddle , albeit mildly , with a powerful brand name ? P & G makes a point of not disclosing any information it regards as commercially sensitive . 'Anything inquiring into our marketing and research we regard as confidential information and we are not prepared to disclose reasons why , ' was the official comment yesterday . But part of the reason for the new brand name lies in P & G 's marketing philosophy - that it must never even be seen to be challenged . An important factor may have been decisions by the Independent Television Association's copy clearance executives , who monitor the content and claims of every television advertisement to cut claims which are demonstrably false . When Persil Liquid was launched the committee examined its claims of product superiority and allowed its advertising campaign to go ahead . Mr Alan Mitchell , editor of Marketing magazine , said : 'Procter 's bible is keeping a definable and demonstrable performance gap of consumer benefits - 'we give a better product to the consumer and shout about it ' . ' The response from P & G was swift . Within two weeks of the launch of Persil Liquid P & G staged a big price promotion in all retail outlets , giving a two-for-the-price-of-one offer on Fairy Liquid . P & G also speeded technological improvements to its detergent . Initially it brought out a new formula Fairy and the copy clearance committee carefully assessed its claims for the new formula , and again did not refuse to allow the claims to be made . Mr Mitchell said : 'The committee finally said : 'It 's a nil-all draw , neither is superior ' . The entire raison d'etre of the P & G marketing bible had been swept away . ' P & G had to make a comeback by using its other strength - product innovation . That innovation is a detergent P & G says shifts 50 per cent more grease , but with a molecular structure which penetrates skin less readily . According to Mr Mitchell , P & G has scored a marketing success with its new brand name . 'It 's very clever . They have changed the name , which focuses on the fact they have a new product . . .a demonstrably better product . ' At the same time the look of the branding will still be dominated by the comfortably familiar word Fairy . P & G will not say how much it has invested in research and development of the new liquid . But the cost of the battle for brand leadership is heavy . Fairy Excel promises softer hands . P & G 's hands are still punching . P & G sells assets , Page 19