THE CONVENTION on biological diversity , agreed at the recent 'Earth Summit' in Rio de Janeiro could have the unintended effect of impeding the breeding of new plant species , plant geneticists fear . The problem arises from uncertainty over the convention 's implications for the legal ownership of plant resources held at 17 major international agricultural research centres . Maintaining biodiversity - that is , a wide range and assortment of plants - helps to provide protection against pests and diseases and is vital for the breeding of improved crop varieties ; it is considered essential for food supplies in both northern and southern hemispheres . In Rio more than 150 countries signed the convention , the stated objectives of which are : 'The conservation of biological diversity , the sustainable use of its components , and the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the utilisation of genetic resources ' . It will come into force once it has been ratified by 30 countries - probably by early next year . The research centres , which make up the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research network , store about 600,000 plant samples in their 'geno-plasmic ' banks . These amount to some 35 per cent of the world's genetic plant material , including major collections of crops such as rice , wheat , maize and other important cereals . Most of the centres are located in developing countries , as the north is poor in genetic materials . One of the centres , the International Rice Research Institute in the Philippines , for example , has about 85,000 cultivated and wild rices in store . Many of the wild varieties have been collected from fields , forests , riverbanks and remote areas . According to the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation , since the beginning of the century about three-quarters of the world 's genetic plant material has been lost , and some 50,000 more species disappear every year , reducing the pool of material that is available for breeding new varieties . Over-harvesting , pollution , and the disappearance of tropical forest cover are largely responsible for this loss . 'The current decline in biodiversity is largely the result of human activity and represents a serious threat , ' says the Agenda 21 plan of action agreed at the Rio summit . The biodiversity convention is designed to halt this loss of plant life and will also mean that a country from which a plant originates can claim rent if it is used in the development of a commercial crop variety . For some countries this could mean sizeable increases in foreign earnings . It is this question of property rights for the countries of origin that could impede distribution of plant material from the 17 research centres a year to crop-breeding programmes throughout the world - at present they send out about 100,000 samples a year . 'One interpretation of the convention is that a research centre would have to get permission from the countries of origin before it distributes materials , ' says Mr Geoffrey Hawtin , director of one of the centres , the Rome-based International Board for Plants Genetic Resources . Some crop varieties , he points out , may have 20 different 'parents ' - meaning that plants from 20 countries have been used in their development . 'The status of this material is unclear , ' believes Mr Hawtin . Depending on how the convention is interpreted , they are either covered by or excluded from its provisions . If crop samples in the CGIR network are covered , then centres 'would need the expressed permission of the countries of origin of all their materials before they would be able to distribute them , ' he says . Such a bureaucratic nightmare could seriously slow down the distribution of crop samples . It could hinder the development of new varieties and have repercussions for food supplies , says Mr Hawtin , 'but it is clearly the convention 's intention to facilitate the movement of materials , rather than impede them ' . He believes that it is necessary for the countries that sign the convention -expected to be all except the US - to clear up the confusion at an early stage and agree on a protocol or similar legal mechanism to guarantee the free exchange of genetic material . Mr Hawtin expects the overall effect of the convention to be positive . 'It calls for more attention to be paid to genetic diversity , for more scientific research to underpin the efforts , and will help raise consciousness of the issues . ' The convention requires countries to establish a system of protected areas 'where special measures need to be taken to conserve biological diversity ' . It stresses the importance of management of resources and the rehabilitation of degraded areas . It also states that industrial countries will provide 'new and additional financial resources ' for the preservation of genetic materials . Funds for this are at present insufficient , believes Mr Hawtin , and efforts are being made to obtain Dollars 300m a year for maintaining biodiversity , about three times more than the present level of funding . However , if the confusion over the status of genetic material is not cleared up before the biodiversity convention takes effect , the world-wide distribution of crop samples from the CGIAR centres could slow down dramatically , causing serious delays in the development of new varieties .