ONE of the challenges of international trade is the limited daily 'time window ' between businesses on opposite sides of the globe . Even in one time zone , a very large number of telephone calls are unsuccessful - either the line is engaged ; or the person being called is at a meeting and not at his or her desk . And even when the person is in the right location , they may not - after all - have the information required , with the result that yet another telephone call is required . This problem with 'telephone-tag , ' as it is widely known , is exacerbated when dealing with people who are in different time zones which means there is only a limited time-window . For this reason , voice mail is increasingly being used , both nationally and internationally , to enhance business communications and thus efficiency . But voice mail comes in all 'flavours ' ranging upwards from the basic 'vanilla . ' In many ways , voice processing is an extension of the principle of the telephone-answering machine - except that as it is under computer control and connected to the telephone system a voice processing systems can do a lot more . Systems may be connected to a company 's PABX for the benefit of both internal and external users ; or to the public network - ordinary or cellular -where the network operator is providing what is , in effect , a bureau service . The biggest of the voice processing business so far has been in these public bureau services , such as BT 's Voicebank , which gives individuals a telephone number on which people can leave messages for them , and VoiceCom , which is aimed at the corporate messaging market . In the US and Canada , there were 2.3m subscribers to public voice processing services in 1991 , according to a recent report by BIS Strategic Decisions . Some 3bn messages were left on the systems and operators earned a revenue of around Dollars 825m . In Europe , growth has been slower , according to BIS . There being about 278,0000 subscribers to public systems , receiving rather fewer calls per mailbox . The revenue was Dollars 148m - and rather more per subscriber , perhaps reflecting a less-competitive market . Advanced voice mail systems allow the recipient to easily reply to a message ; or to append a note to it and either copy it or forward it to one or more other people . In fact , just as with conventional office memos , voice mail can be sent to an individual or there can be circulation lists . Recipients act upon , reply and forward the memo ( with or without appended notes ) for action , as required . A good example of a company which recognises the need for effective communications is PC software company , WordPerfect , which is well-known for the quality of its customer support . The company uses a Brite VM2000 voice messaging system which claims to ensure that 'telephone calls , whether internal or external are always answered . 'The caller also gets information to enable him to make an intelligent response : leave a message , call again at another time , and so on . . ' Similarly , British Petroleum has recently installed a VMX system at its London headquarters with the aim of improving the productivity of staff who spend a high proportion of their time on the phone , whilst providing a more efficient service to both customers and suppliers . BP 's special projects manager says the new system 'puts control of the telephone into our own hands . It helps save time and effort spent on mundane and time-consuming tasks , such as message-taking and answering colleagues' constantly ringing phones . ' However , to make best advantage of voice mail , the facilities should be available across the whole organisation . Here , a problem may arise where a network - frequently as a result of take-overs and mergers - contains a variety of different PABXs and incompatible voice mail products . Nigel Harte , Mercury 's business manager for voice processing , comments : 'In the very near future , the implementation of AMIS ( audio message interchange specification ) , the voice mail equivalent of OSI , will enable feature transparency between different manufacturer 's systems . ' This will be an important step because , at present , messages can generally only be forwarded across a network made up of similar systems . Nigel Harte explains that AMIS was originally mooted in the US by the manufacturer of voice processing systems , VMX ; Coca Cola ; and the PABX manufacturer , Rolm . Since then , the Voice Messaging User-interface Forum ( VMUIF ) has been set up to act as the standards body . The forum is attracting a growing number of other suppliers , such as Octel Communications , and operators have joined . The versatility of voice mail can be seen from the 'Virtual Telephone , ' ( VT ) developed by Octel in conjunction with Brazilian telecommunications operator , Telebras . The VT is intended for parts of the country where there is a long waiting list for telephones . Using the system , which is implemented on an Octel voice mail system , callers can leave detailed messages in a mailbox . Each VT-user carries a pager so that , when a message reaches his mailbox , he is bleeped and can then go to the nearest phone in which can be retrieved by the Virtual Telephone owner from any phone , including pay phones . Thus , most of the benefits of an actual individual telephone can be rapidly provided by the administration - at a fraction of the cost , and in a manner which will not become obsolete even when the number of telephones grows .