THE US Eximbank is to adjust the fees it charges exporters when it provides them with insurance cover on export contracts . The changes are the result of a programme of comprehensive credit reform and link with efforts by other leading export credit agencies to provide a 'level playing field ' for exporters to compete for foreign contracts . The adjustments come into effect on May 15 and will 'somewhat increase costs at the higher risk end ' , according to Mr Ray Albright , the bank 's new executive vice-president . The fees are not intended to cover fully the bank 's exposure to possible default on contract payments , but are intended to reflect more accurately the level of risk involved in exports country by country . Any scale that aimed at full recovery of liabilities would result in 'killing exports where you still want to do business ' , Mr Albright said . A month ago , Bonn revealed that Hermes , its leading export credit agency , would abandon a long-standing practice of offering exporters a standard fee for providing export credit insurance . This had become a source of controversy because it gave German exporters a competitive advantage in high-risk countries , but penalised them in competing for contracts in countries regarded as low credit risks . The Eximbank 's new charges will range on a scale from ' A ' and ' A-minus ' down to ' F ' and ' F-minus ' . Fees at the highest-risk end of the scale could rise to 10 per cent on a 10-year contract . Once the Eximbank has fixed a basic country rate , then fees will vary depending on the type of deal : sovereign public-sector purchasers will get the best country rate , with non-sovereign public-sector purchasers and creditworthy banks being ranked as slightly more expensive , and creditworthy borrowers a little higher still . 'It has taken us four to five years to get a handle on this , ' Mr Albright said . 'We are very comfortable with the ( new system ) and feel we are technical leaders . 'We now have an integrated country risk assessment process covering all US government agencies , with Exim as lead drafter . 'We are keen to accelerate international harmonisation , and if this can move the system up a little bit , we will be happy to do that . ' Mr Albright was also comfortable with a recent Berne Union workshop in which the Eximbank and Britain 's Export Credit Guarantee Department ran their country risk assessment models in parallel on a variety of countries and 'found our results were very close ' .