La Rochelle , best known to French holiday makers for its sea front , is about to find itself on another frontier - a technological one . Peugeot , the French car maker , is so convinced that Europeans will be buying at least 200,000 electric vehicles a year by the turn of the century , that it is embarking on a joint venture with utility Electricite de France . La Rochelle will be equipped with prototype recharging stations for an initial fleet of 50 electric Peugeot 106 and Citroen AX cars to be placed next year on long-term assessment with individual users in the city . Depending on how well the cars are received , the number allocated to the project may rise to 300 . According to Jean-Yves Helmer , director in charge of Peugeot group's electric vehicles programme , the company has also signed a partnership agreement with Generale de Transports et d'Industrie ( GTI ) to conduct an experiment within another large , but as yet unnamed , French city . This will involve a second fleet of electric cars which will be made available for public rental . The recharging stations , expected to be mainly adjuncts of conventional filling stations , will be used to explore charging times , the long-term effects of rapid-charging and other practical aspects of operating electric cars . Peugeot is undertaking what it describes as ' a several hundred million francs ' investment in its 'EV ' ( electric vehicle ) programme even though it does not expect to be able to break even on them until a volume of at least 50,000 units a year is reached . However , Helmer stresses his belief that not only will Europeans be buying 200,000 electric vehicles a year by the end of the decade but that Peugeot will be able to capture at least 25 per cent of that market . Peugeot is claiming to be relatively unaffected by some of the technical hitches , delays and disappointments that frequently have marked the motor industry 's attempts to develop viable EVs . Despite severe limitations on range and performance imposed by current battery technology , Helmer insists that whole-life costs of buying and operating electric cars can be made competitive with petrol or diesel equivalents . The group has already built or taken orders for some 500 electric Peugeot and Citroen vans , which it began producing last year . These are now in use by , among others , Hong Kong 's utility , China Light and Power . Meanwhile , General Motors is unveiling at the Geneva motor show this week a concept car which adds a new twist to the EV versus conventional car debate . The small hatchback-sized vehicle , named 'Twin ' , has interchangeable petrol or electric propulsion . Ford is also to unveil an electric concept car at Geneva . Called the Ghia Connecta , it uses the drivetrain technology already developed by Ford for a 100-strong fleet of Escort-based vans due to start trials in the UK and US next year .