NEW ZEALAND 'S political and trading relationships with Australia have undergone striking changes since the signing of the closer economic relations pact a decade ago . Today they are major trading partners , with increasingly close links in defence , aviation , customs and police . It was not always so . For though both countries had similar British origins and links in war , migration flows ( New Zealand is much closer to the main Australian population centres of Sydney and Melbourne than these are to Perth in West Australia ) and similar democratic systems , both jealously guarded their independence . New Zealand , as the more Anglophile of the two , retained closer trading relationships with Britain after it joined the EC . Australia , the stronger economy , increasingly looked to Japan and Asia . Enthusiasm for closer economic relations was stronger in New Zealand . Signing of the CER agreement succeeded because of the enthusiasm of Mr Hugh Templeton , National 's trade minister , and Mr Doug Anthony , Australia 's deputy prime minister and leader of the minority Country party , both frustrated at the slow progress of Nafta , the previous trade pact . Today it would be difficult to imagine any serious rupture in the CER agreement as it has produced significant benefits to both countries . Yet the fragility of the relationship was shown last month when Mr Don McKinnon , New Zealand 's deputy prime minister , needed considerable diplomatic skills to defuse a strong move within the governing Australian Labor party and the ACTU , the trade union organisation , to impose work permits on New Zealand workers who were allegedly working outside the union movement for cut price wages , and not paying Australian tax . As seen from New Zealand , the issue was a crucial one , and struck at the heart of CER , as an open and free labour market was seen as a vital component . Work permits had never been needed between the two countries , and the issue , initially sparked by the Australian Shearers ' Union , seemed trivial . In his talks with Australian ministers Mr McKinnon hinted delicately that New Zealand could retaliate with reciprocal requirements . This could have profound effects on major Australian companies in the banking , insurance and manufacturing industries which have recently moved to dominate some sectors of New Zealand business . Disrupting the free movement of labour , Mr McKinnon warned , could act to the ultimate detriment of the Australian economy . Mr McKinnon , who has excellent relations with senior labour figures , succeeded in his mission with an agreement that tax matters would be investigated . But the matter left a feeling of nervousness in New Zealand government circles that a relatively minor issue , whipped up by trade unionists , got as far as it did in nearly undermining CER . There is also some concern in Wellington that the review of CER , due this year , seems to be making very slow progress . It is concentrating on a number of issues , including making it easier to trade , travel ( where some progress has been made ) and to invest in and work between the two countries . The review is also supposed to consider such questions as a new double tax agreement which would facilitate the paying of imputation , or tax on shares in companies in the two countries . Widespread publicity in Australia about the success or otherwise of New Zealand 's economic reforms , especially in curbing union power and cutting wage agreements , has antagonised some Australian ministers in the Labor government who , judging from recent speeches , seem keen to stop the spread of what is known in Australia as 'the New Zealand disease ' . Both Mr McKinnon and Mr Jim Bolger , the prime minister , are expected to concentrate their efforts in the coming months on trying to play down ideological differences with the Australian government and return to the warmer relationship that existed between 1984 and 1991 when both countries had Labour governments . During that period , the reformist New Zealand government of David Lange swept aside a vast array of controls on the economy , including relaxing ownership rules on companies . This led to a rush of Australian investment , which accelerated after the 1987 share market crash as share values plummeted in New Zealand . The strengthening business links became apparent in May and June when the Australian government was seen in Wellington to have shown considerable flexibility to the New Zealand position in establishing its new aviation policy . The first step in this was to create a single aviation market between the two countries , while New Zealand needed to move to protect the interests of Air New Zealand , in which Qantas is a substantial shareholder . Politically , there remains considerable public disquiet over the signing of a NZDollars 2.4bn agreement by the Labour government in 1988 under which the Australians are to build two frigates for New Zealand . Costs have risen by 31 per cent already , and a government committee has expressed reservations about the wisdom of the deal which was supposed to have led to NZDollars 700m worth of business for New Zealand manufacturers . The frigates could have been bought much more cheaply from British or European shipyards . While overall trade statistics show that trade between Australia and New Zealand is broadly in balance , that reverses the situation from the 1970s when Australian manufacturers dominated . New Zealand exported Dollars 2.11bn worth of goods to Australia in 1990-91 , the latest year when figures were available . This was a 1 per cent drop in 1990 figures , and represented 17.9 per cent of all New Zealand exports ( compared with 18.9 per cent in 1990 ) . The drop was due to recessionary trends in Australia . New Zealand now supplies 4.7 per cent of all Australian imports . Australia has increasingly drawn ahead of Japan , the EC and the US to become New Zealand 's most important market , taking 52 per cent of the country's manufactured goods . It is estimated that , thanks to the economic reforms , currency changes , lower wage and industry costs , New Zealand companies enjoy a 25 per cent cost advantage over their Australian counterparts . From the New Zealand perspective , there are several worries over the future of the agreement . These rest on the need to maintain the present competitive advantage ; uncertainties of how far the Australian tariff reduction reform programme will go and what effect this will have on exports of top quality New Zealand apparel and garments . On the positive side , it is now widely acknowledged in business circles that barring unforeseen political problems , the two countries will inevitably grow increasingly close , leading to the hoped-for single market . Among business people , there is also growing talk of eventual political union , with New Zealand in effect becoming a state of Australia . However , this is unlikely to happen quickly . Older New Zealanders - and the present generation of politicians - will not rush to give up their notions of independence .