John Ratliff , who heads European marketing for the world 's biggest computer disaster recovery company , Comdisco Disaster Recovery Services of the US , says he is anxious not to sound 'like an ambulance chaser ' . But he accepts that the British mainland bombing campaign by the IRA has given a new fillip to the business of computer disaster recovery , in which CDRS 's UK subsidiary , Failsafe Roc , is a market leader . Last month 's announcement by UK insurers that they will withdraw cover for terrorism from conventional insurance policies beginning next year , has spurred interest in a product which was already attracting growing interest . 'As people are forced to review their insurance arrangements , they are becoming aware that the next best thing is contingency planning , ' says Charles Shaw , director of consultancy at Safetynet , another market leader . Services offered by disaster recovery companies range from the provision of alternative customised office space to parallel computer facilities , which automatically duplicate every detail entered in a company 's day-to-day operations - producing an immediate up-to-date copy of all transactions and comprehensive disaster recovery plans . The UK market for such services is growing at between 25 to 30 per cent each year , according to industry estimates . Datanews , a public relations agency which specialises in the IT field , says around a dozen companies , including Failsafe Roc , Safetynet , IBM , Datashield and Computer Disaster Recovery , are now competing in a market worth up to Pounds 150m a year in fee income . Failsafe Roc specialises in providing services to users of IBM mainframe computers , and has 700 clients in the UK . Safetynet has 350 clients , including 120 financial institutions , and specialises in mid-range IBM AS/400 computers . Underpinning the growth is the increasing dependence by nearly all of the financial services sector and increasing numbers of manufacturing companies on computers and electronic flows of information . Banks and insurance companies , for example , need to maintain electronic fund transfer or claims payment systems , while many manufacturers and retailers are reliant on techniques such as 'just-in-time ' warehousing in order to reduce the cost of holding stocks of raw materials or products . Frequently , relatively small accidents - a labourer accidentally cutting fibre optic cable , for example - can lead to big losses of information and money and potentially the business itself . 'If you 're in the finance industry , every minute down can mean several millions of pounds lost . If denied use of computer systems , the clock starts ticking and the bank loses three days ' business it will never get back , ' says Ratliff . 'People have this wonderful misconception of what a disaster is ; they think it is a flood or a fire . Actually it is when you ca n't use a computer - and the most common reason is hardware failure , ' says Colin Appleby , industry analyst with Datanews . At the same time , demand for disaster recovery services is growing because companies are taking a more sophisticated view of how to manage the day-to-day risks of conducting their businesses . Already , many bigger companies now invest in risk prevention - buying fail-safe mechanisms for electronic equipment or installing sprinklers in warehouses , for example - as well as buying conventional insurance . In the same way , many risk managers now prepare contingency plans , which spell out what senior managers must do when a disaster does occur . 'Awareness is so much higher than it has ever been before . Five years ago people would say : ' I 've got insurance ' . Now they realise that insurance is not going to look after everything , ' says Shaw . 'If you are a bank and you take a hit that makes your facilities inoperable , ' says Ratliff , 'all the insurance payments in the world won't necessarily save you money . ' Ironically , many of the companies affected by the IRA bomb in the City of London last April successfully implemented disaster recovery plans , reducing losses due to computer damage . Even so , most of the estimated Pounds 750m in claims stems from loss of income rather than from damage to property . So the explosions served to demonstrate the potential scale of business interruption losses . John Athawes , marketing development manager for Commercial Union Risk Management , which offers disaster recovery services , says his company is receiving 'serious ' inquiries at the rate of 10 per week over the past few months . 'Major organisations , particularly banks and building societies , are taking this very seriously , ' says Athawes . A conference which focused on Commercial Union 's own highly successful disaster recovery , which was brought into play when its own offices were destroyed by the April bomb , attracted 300 delegates . Peter Sommer , of computer consultancy Virtual City Associates , says that even if insurers are persuaded to offer cover for business interruption or losses caused by terrorists , they are likely to insist that policyholders have disaster recovery plans in place . 'You have to place these things together . No one will offer cover for business interruption or consequential loss if they do n't understand the steps the policyholder will take to recover from a loss , ' he says .