It is not new for Americans to criticise Japan , even to the extent of smashing a Japanese car with a sledgehammer in protest at Japanese trade practices , as happened in Detroit this week . Nor , is it new for the odd Japanese politician to insult American workers , as Mr Kiichi Miyazawa , the Japanese prime minister , inadvertently did this week when he questioned Americans ' 'work ethic ' . What is novel is the reaction these insults have provoked . In Japan , people are at last beginning to say what they have long felt - that , in some respects at least , the Japanese way of life is superior to America 's . Mr Takayoshi Miyagawa , a public opinion poll expert , says : 'America today is no longer the America which we admired for so long . ' The smashing of the Honda car was widely publicised in Japanese newspapers . One commentator said : 'This childish American stunt makes us feel even more contempt for Americans . And , although Mr Miyazawa apologised for the 'misunderstanding ' caused by his remarks , many Japanese feel that he accurately reflected their feelings in saying that too many Americans went to work on Wall Street and too few in industry . Japanese employees do work longer hours than their US counterparts - an average of 2,201 hours in 1990 , compared with about 1,900 in the US - according to German Economic Institute figures ; but Japanese productivity remains lower than in the US . In 1988 Japan was 80 per cent as productive as the US - although the gap is narrowing . There was also some annoyance that the comments had been reported overseas . One former foreign ministry official said that , since the prime minister had been talking in the Diet , he might have assumed that he was speaking only to Japanese - a sign perhaps of the distance the Japanese still have to travel before they are truly at home in an international environment . Indeed , Japan remains uncertain of the position it wants in world politics . The government 's policy is to secure greater influence , through increased participation in the UN , including a permanent seat on the Security Council . But most Japanese people are wary - witness the popular opposition to a bill that would allow Japanese servicemen to join UN peacekeeping missions . Taxpayers are increasingly critical of Japan 's contributions to overseas aid . One official says that , when he spoke in a provincial city , he was asked : 'Why spend it abroad ? Spend it here . ' In political affairs , therefore , the US is likely to continue to take the lead over Japan . Much depends on how the recent spate of Japanese criticism of the US develops . It could die away , as did public protests about the security pact and the Vietnam War . Moreover , anti-US feelings mix uneasily with a love of things American . McDonald 's and Coca-Cola , baseball , Arnold Schwarzenegger and Madonna - all are worshipped in Japan . Hawaii is the most popular holiday destination . Equally , if some Japanese are quick to condemn Americans for being lazy , ill-educated and spendthrift , others are sad to see a great ally humbled . Among them is Mr Miyazawa , who during Mr Bush 's visit called on the Japanese to help the US in return for the support America extended after the war . He has said that the US saved Japan from starvation . During Mr Bush 's visit , however , the Japanese felt deeply insulted by the chief executives of the big three US motor companies who accompanied him , and who demanded that Japanese carmakers agree to buy their products . If anything can promote anti-Americanism in Japan , it is bullying over economic issues by the US . As Mr Miyazawa says : 'When the US acts like a dictator over Japanese businesses then we feel contempt towards the US . '