THE US Federal Reserve Board plans to propose that a special trusteeship be created to allow the sale of First American Bankshares , the troubled Washington-based bank that was secretly and illegally controlled by the collapsed Bank of Credit and Commerce International ( BCCI ) . A US official said the plan was discussed yesterday by federal officials at a meeting in Washington . The aim would be to allow First American to be recapitalised as soon as possible . The bank , BCCI 's biggest US investment , suffered a more than doubled 1991 loss of Dollars 358m ( Pounds 208.1m ) and needs to raise new capital immediately . Its equity base shrank last year from Dollars 711m to Dollars 422m , while total assets dropped to Dollars 8.4bn from Dollars 11bn in 1990 . Deposits at First American , which operates in four states , fell from Dollars 9bn to Dollars 7.1bn last year as worried depositors withdrew funds from the six banks owned by the group . The trusteeship plan would implement a March 1991 Fed order instructing BCCI to divest itself of shares in First American held by Credit & Commerce American Holdings NV ( CCAH ) , an offshore holding vehicle that featured several nominee shareholders described by the Fed last year as 'front men' for BCCI . The move would almost certainly rekindle the dispute over First American's ownership , as it could trigger responses from BCCI figures such as Sheikh Kemal Adham , a key shareholder and former head of Saudi Arabia's intelligence service . The plan , which may require a court ruling , could also affect the government of Abu Dhabi , which holds 28 per cent of First American and was also majority owner of BCCI , now in liquidation . A US official familiar with the Fed plan said the aim was to allow the bank to be sold , possibly placing the cash proceeds into an escrow account . First American has not been accused of any wrongdoing , although congressional investigators are still looking into the types of accounts maintained at the bank by the Central Intelligence Agency .