A DECISIVE 134 majority ( 372-238 ) yesterday propelled Miss Betty Boothroyd , 62-year-old Labour MP for West Bromwich West , into the historic role of first woman speaker of the House of Commons . Boisterous good humour interlaced the tributes to Miss Boothroyd 's personal qualities , and her triumph led to a technically disorderly outbreak of handclapping in which Mr John Major , the prime minister , and other members of the cabinet joined . In the first contested election for the Speakership since 1951 , the reputation for authoritative impartiality that Miss Boothroyd has established while serving as a deputy speaker since 1987 was emphatically underlined from the Conservative as well as the opposition benches . Miss Boothroyd - formally Speaker-elect until her appointment is confirmed by the Queen - was proposed by Mr John Biffen ( C Shropshire North ) , a former leader of the Commons . Any doubts about the outcome of the vote were soon removed as 72 Conservative MPs joined with most occupants of the opposition benches in heading for the lobby to ensure that Miss Boothroyd became the 155th Speaker of the Commons . Sir Edward Heath , who presided over the proceedings as father of the House , confirmed the defeat of an amendment to secure the appointment as Speaker of Mr Peter Brooke , the former Northern Ireland secretary and the MP for the City of London and Westminster South . Miss Boothroyd urged her colleagues to 'elect me for what I am and not for what I was born ' . Mr Brooke , who secured the votes of most of his former Cabinet colleagues , was among the first to congratulate the Madam Speaker-elect . Miss Boothroyd , only the third Labour MP to be elected speaker and the only former member of Labour 's national executive to hold the post , will now become a familiar figure on television . She recalled that her first experience of the small screen was as member of the dancing Tiller girls . After a mock display of reluctance to take up her new post - a reminder of the times when the Commons was in conflict with the Crown and the Speaker's term of office was frequently ended by summary execution - Miss Boothroyd pledged herself to do all in her power to preserve and cherish the traditions of the House of Commons . Mr Major , who abstained in the division , led the congratulations to Miss Boothroyd by stressing that she had been chosen by 'vote and acclaim ' . In becoming the first woman to assume the 'awesome responsiblity of speaker' she had certainly made history . Mr Neil Kinnock , the Labour leader , highlighted the mastery of procedure shown by Miss Boothroyd when , on being installed in the Chair , she had declined to call the prime minister to speak until the mace had been placed in position by Sir Alan Urwick , the serjeant-at-arms .