THE launch this week by Union Bank of Switzerland of SFr300m in 2 3/4 per cent notes for Daiwa House Industry marks the return of the country's largest bank to the Japanese section of the Swiss franc bond market after being effectively blackballed for several months . 'UBS is proud to be mandated by a prestigious issuer like Daiwa House , and we are looking for further business , ' Mr Arthur Wulkan , senior vice-president of UBS , said . The row developed as a result of some peculiar customs in bond issuing for Japanese companies in Switzerland . The main problem is that Japanese banks and securities companies closely associated with an issuer get large allocations even if they have no real placing power . They then tend to sell their bonds quickly in the market . When conditions are fair , this is an opportunity to make easy profits , but when conditions turn sour , as they did last year , it means the lead manager has to become a buyer of last resort . The unhappiness of the big Swiss banks with this practice came to a head when several Japanese financial houses sold their allocations of an issue led by UBS for Takashimaya , the leading department store group , in a grey market even before the issue was launched . An angry UBS abruptly cancelled their allocations , leaving them unable to fulfil their grey market sales contracts . The bank then followed up by setting new rules for its syndicates to prevent the grey market action . Some of these rules , notably insisting on an alphabetical listing of syndicate members , offended Japanese sensitivities , and the entire Japanese financial community retaliated by effectively blackballing UBS . The bank , which ranked a strong third among book runners last year with SFr1.76bn in issues , had not led a single one this year until the Daiwa House issue . UBS eased its tough stance in April , saying it would respect Japanese customs and 'show appropriate flexibility ' . A leading Japanese securities company official in Zurich said yesterday he thought the big Japanese banks would continue to try to convince their clients not to use UBS as a lead manager . However , Japanese securities companies tended to sympathise with UBS .