SMITHKLINE Beecham , the Anglo-US pharmaceuticals and consumer products group , is to create a partnership with Marion Merrell Dow to develop and market over-the-counter ( OTC ) non-prescription medicines in the US . The new group would have had sales last year of Dollars 660m ( Pounds 345.5m ) and operating profits of Dollars 120m , making it the fifth largest OTC group in the US . SmithKline Beecham 's shares closed down 7p at 455p . SmithKline Beecham will initially own 90 per cent and Marion Merrell Dow 10 per cent of the partnership . SmithKline Beecham 's American OTC sales last year were about Dollars 550m , while Marion Merrell Dow 's were Dollars 111m . The aim is a 50-50 arrangement as new products are licensed . The companies said they were committed to similar co-operation in other countries . Mr John Ziegler , North American president of SmithKline Beecham consumer brands , will lead the partnership . Mr Bob Bauman , the Anglo-US group 's chief executive said : 'When SmithKline Beecham was created we said our vision was to achieve leadership in healthcare and in each of our four business segments . ' He added that the partnership with Marion Merrell Dow was another step towards achieving this goal . Both groups have prescription products that could be marketed by the new group . SmithKline Beecham has asked the US Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) for an OTC licence for Tagamet , the anti-ulcer drug whose patents run out in 1994 . It had worldwide sales last year of more than Dollars 1bn . Marion Merrell Dow said it might seek OTC licences for Seldane , an anti-histamine , and the anti-smoking products , Nicorette and Nicoderm . Nicoderm , which uses a transdermal patch , was launched in 1991 , and had sales of Dollars 137m during the first six months of this year . 'The deal is rather imprecise , ' said Mr Jonathan de Pass , pharmaceuticals analyst at BZW . 'It all depends on whether they receive FDA approval for Seldane and Tagamet , and whether they successfully extend the relationship worldwide . If they do , the implications are enormous . ' Safety concerns about the new partnership 's Seldane and Tagamet may delay or prevent FDA approval . Seldane is potentially dangerous to patients with a damaged liver or those taking two other drugs , Ketoconazole , an anti-fungal treatment , and Erythromycin , an antibiotic . There are also fears that patients with stomach cancer could mis-diagnose an ulcer and buy Tagamet .