SOUTH KOREA and Japan yesterday sought to thaw a recent chill in their relations and to promote closer co-operation on issues affecting North-east Asia . Meeting in Kyoto , Japan , the South Korean President Roh Tae-woo and Japanese Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa held the first of planned regular bilateral discussions , modelled after the informal Franco-German consultations . South Korea is trying to establish a new diplomatic role in the region , serving as an intermediary in reducing tensions between Japan , China and Russia . Conflicts among these regional powers have harmed Korea over the past 400 years . But Seoul 's recent overtures to China and Russia have caused problems with Japan , South Korea 's former colonial master . The establishment of Sino-South Korean relations in August raised concerns in Tokyo about the emergence of a possible alliance against Japanese influence in the region . The decision by Russian President Boris Yeltsin to visit Seoul this month after cancelling his trip to Japan over the Kurile Island dispute has added to those fears . South Korean officials said that President Roh wanted to reassure Japan of Korean friendship in the wake of these diplomatic developments and to show both Beijing and Moscow that Seoul-Tokyo relations remain close and co-operative . South Korea needs Japanese co-operation in forcing North Korea to accept on-the-spot inspections of possible nuclear weapons facilities . Japan has indicated that it will not normalise relations or promote economic ties with Pyongyang until the nuclear issue is resolved . But South Korea and Japan appeared to have made little progress yesterday in settling their bilateral problems , including Korea 's trade deficit with Japan and financial compensation for the Japanese use of Korean women as military prostitutes , or 'comfort girls ' , during the second world war . South Korea 's trade deficit with Japan this year is likely to be twice as big as its total trade deficit of Dollars 3bn ( Pounds 1.92bn ) . South Korea relies heavily on Japan for machinery and industrial components . The trade deficit would be even bigger if it was not for import restrictions that South Korea places on Japanese products . Seoul is demanding that Japan help reduce the persistent trade deficit by transferring technology to Korea and increasing Korean imports through tariff cuts .