GERMANY 'S money supply continued to grow well outside its target range last month , giving a clear signal to participants at this Sunday 's Group of Seven meeting in Washington that the Bundesbank will hold firm on monetary policy . Mr Helmut Schlesinger , the president of the German central bank , will attend the G7 meeting of leading industrial countries with Mr Hans Tietmeyer , his deputy , but economists do not expect them to come under serious pressure to cut interest rates as a stimulant to the world economy . The Bundesbank has repeatedly stressed its concern with the high rate of money supply growth compared with the target range of between 3.5 and 5.5 per cent which had been set for this year . In March , M3 , the broad monetary aggregate , grew at an annual rate of 9.75 per cent after 8.5 per cent in February and 9 per cent in January . Propelling M3 higher has been heavy lending by banks to companies and individuals . Much of this has been to finance corporate investment in eastern Germany . Mr Paul Brunker , European economist at Robert Fleming Securities in London , said it was unlikely M3 would return to the target range this year , based on the average for the fourth quarter of 1991 used by the Bundesbank as its base . Also worrying the bank has been inflation , which reached an annual rate of 4.8 per cent in March . Official German interest rates were lifted by half a point in December , putting the Lombard rate at 9.75 per cent . The Bundesbank 's stance received support this week from the International Monetary Fund , which called on the Bonn government to cut its high fiscal deficits . The central bank has warned that large transfers to east Germany must be accompanied by a greater determination to curb spending in the west . Mr Theo Waigel , Germany 's finance minister , responded to the Bundesbank's message at the Easter weekend by promising tough policies to clamp down on expenditure . But his promises were short on detail . US view of German rates , Page 7