WILLY BRANDT , the former West German chancellor who died on Thursday aged 78 , belonged to that select band of post-war European leaders who stamped an indelible mark not just on their countries , but across the European continent . His chancellorship , from 1969 to 1974 , was relatively short . But his period of uninterrupted influence on the centre stage of international politics was longer than that of any other contemporary politician , in Germany or abroad . In an almost kaleidoscopic variety of roles , ranging from charismatic young mayor of Berlin to his latter years as elder statesman , Brandt gave shape and direction to German politics during four post-war decades . In his last years , before he was stricken by cancer in the spring , Brandt took up a new part as an emotional force behind German unification . The turbulence of his long life mirrored Germany 's own vicissitudes . Brandt was a man of varied hues and changing moods . His capacity for misjudgment could sometimes be almost as striking as his qualities as an activist and visionary . Yet beyond all the restlessness which drove him on and the controversy which dogged him , Brandt stood out as Germany 's paramount statesman of peace . After the horror and the shame of the second world war , he was the first chancellor to allow foreigners - and his own compatriots - to believe again in a decent Germany playing its part in the international community . Brandt 's career , moulded beneath the shadows of the Third Reich and maturing during the cold war , was dedicated to ensuring that his country would never again be a source of instability and evil . Through his Ostpolitik in the early 1970s , normalising West Germany 's relations with its neighbours in the east , Brandt did more than any other politician before Mikhail Gorbachev to bridge the post-1945 division of the continent . His policies on eastern Europe were hotly contested at the time by the German right as a sell-out to communism . But Brandt was a prime architect of the detente which eventually , in 1990 , made German unification possible . In the 1970s and 1980s he occupied himself increasingly with international affairs , as chairman of the International Socialists and of the Brandt Commission . It was a source of frustration that the commission , despite all its good intentions , failed to make any headway in closing the north-south economic gap . The sweeping aside of communism in East Germany in the autumn and winter of 1989 gave Brandt a pivotal new domestic role in a nation being reforged before the eyes of an astonished world . At an age when many lesser men would have settled into their armchairs , Brandt was out on the stump in both parts of Germany , still fighting elections for his Social Democratic party ( SPD ) , still drawing the crowds with his peculiar brand of rasping oratory and his message that the Fatherland was now 'growing together ' again . Brandt 's political pinnacle came much earlier , during his five years as chancellor - a period marking the return of the SPD as the main party in government for the first time since the Weimar Republic of 1919-33 . His chancellorship ended abruptly , with his resignation over a spy affair - still one of Germany 's most opaque post-war political crises . He remained SPD chairman until 1987 , and was the party 's honorary chairman until his death . Brandt showed a singular ability both to stir ( his power to attract younger women had a legendary , if not notorious , quality ) and to disappoint . His setbacks were almost as striking as his triumphs , and for all his undoubted thoughtfulness he could teeter alarmingly between hesitancy and rashness . In many ways he was the Hamlet of German politics . Partly because he was so often going against the tide of contemporary ideas , Brandt was an uncomfortable , often enigmatic figure . Respected rather than loved by the Social Democratic party , he was not the first German leader to owe part of his authority to his aloofness . Manoeuvring his way through pitfalls along his political path , Brandt was all too often reminded that he remained ultimately an outsider . The central component of Brandt 's Ostpolitik was recognition of East Germany as a separate state . Although he clung to the nebulous goal of 'unity of the nation ' ( a term he distinguished from 'reunification ' , which he rejected because of its revanchiste overtones ) , he cajoled his countrymen to come to terms with the legacy of Hitler . By accepting the status quo of division , Brandt laid an important part of the groundwork for eventually ending it . When the German black , red and gold flag was hoisted in Berlin in the midnight Unity Day ceremony on October 3 1990 , the 76-year-old Brandt was there with the other dignatories on the balcony of the Reichstag , staring out at the huge crowds with the inscrutability which , with age , he came to wear like a mask . In accepting the Nobel peace prize , awarded in 1971 for his Ostpolitik breakthrough , he said : ' I believe in diversity , and hence in doubt . ' So it was an entirely typical paradox that unity took place after Brandt had given up any idea of seeing it happen . 'Who would want to believe that , one day , the German Democratic Republic would be annexed to the Federal Republic , and that would be that ? ' he wrote in his memoirs , published in 1989 . The elliptical question was a favourite form of statement for a man who could not take refuge in certainties . His scepticism , like his self-doubt , had its origin in the complexities of his childhood . He was born as Herbert Ernst Frahm on December 18 1913 in the northern city of Lubeck , the illegitimate son of a 19-year-old shopgirl . He never knew his father - a loss which helped shape his non-conformism and concern for the under-privileged , as well as a sporadic lack of discipline . He grew up under the guardianship of his 'grandfather ' ( a man who , in a further twist , turned out not to have been the father of his mother ) . He joined the SPD at the age of 16 . Disenchanted with the Weimar Republic , and supporting a more active struggle against the far right , he quit a year later , in 1931 , to join a splinter group , the Socialist Workers party . This early defiance provides a key to his later tolerance , as party chairman , of the radicalism of the Young Socialists during the 1970s , and his attempted espousal of the cause of the Greens ecology party during the 1980s . Of the younger generation , he once said : 'They feel that the old and middle-aged may already have made so many compromises that they can no longer confront the new tasks of today . ' Shortly after Hitler took power in 1933 , Brandt 's splinter group , aware that he was in danger of arrest by the Nazis , decided to send him to Oslo . He was smuggled out of Germany on a fishing smack , taking with him the name of Willy Brandt which he had already been using as a pen-name . It was the start of 12 years of exile . During his three attempts to run for the chancellorship during the 1960s , Brandt 's political enemies tried to use this emigration to show that he was less than totally committed to his country . Indeed , Brandt 's views on Germany often seemed strangely detached . He once said that Chancellor Helmut Kohl - with whom he forged , in his later years , a close political relationship , though never real friendship - would be a better leader if he knew a little more about the world outside . Brandt became a Socialist activist in Scandinavia , returning briefly to Berlin on an undercover mission . As a journalist on the Republican side in 1937 , he witnessed the horrors of the Spanish civil war . In 1940 he was arrested by the invading German forces in Norway , while wearing a Norwegian uniform . Interned and then released , he fled to neutral Sweden , where he continued his underground work , took Norwegian citizenship and met his future wife , Rut , who was Norwegian-born . ( His marriage to his first wife , Carlota , whom he met in 1940 , broke down in 1944 . After his marriage to Rut also ended in divorce , Brandt wed in 1983 the journalist and author Brigitte Seebacher . ) Brandt returned to his defeated homeland in 1945 , as a correspondent covering the Nuremberg trials . He found his way back to the SPD , but remained a Norwegian citizen until 1948 . In 1947 he became press attache at the Norwegian military mission in Berlin . Shortly afterwards , he met Edzard Reuter , the SPD governing mayor of West Berlin during the 1948-49 blockade , who heavily influenced Brandt 's firm anti-Communist policies in Berlin during the 1950s and 1960s . In 1949 Brandt was elected to the Bundestag as a West Berlin deputy , and in 1955 he became president of the West Berlin senate . In November 1956 he twice showed his oratorical skills by stopping crowds of Berliners , angered by Soviet crushing of the Hungarian revolution , from rushing into East Berlin towards bloody confrontation with Russian tanks . In 1957 Brandt was elected governing mayor of West Berlin . This was a crucial period : the SPD , under the guidance of the party 's irascible strategist Herbert Wehner , was moving to cast off the encumbrances of Marxist ideology and reform itself into a modern Volkspartei ( people's party ) . Brandt 's experience in 1961 , when he witnessed the western allies' helplessness as the Berlin Wall was built , had a profound effect on his future foreign policy . The implication was clear : however important Bonn's links with the US , Washington was incapable of giving West Germany full protection against the Soviet Union . Through building up relations with the East , Bonn would eventually have to take greater initiative for securing its own security . After three years as foreign minister in the Grand Coalition with the Christian Democrats of 1966-69 , Brandt had the chance to put his precepts into effect when he became chancellor in 1970 , in coalition with the Free Democrats . His finest hour came when the coalition was returned with an increased majority in the 1972 elections , making the SPD the largest single party in the Bundestag . By 1972 , the high points of his crusading European policies - the emotional visit to Erfurt in East Germany in 1970 , and his dramatic gesture later that year , when he knelt at the Warsaw monument to the Jewish ghetto - were past . The victory bloom soon wilted . As he ran into obstacles with France over policies towards western Europe , he became bogged down by domestic difficulties , particularly an outbreak of public-sector strikes . In April 1974 , Gunter Guillaume , an official in the Chancellery who had been sufficiently close to Brandt to have accompanied him on holiday to Norway , was arrested on charges of spying for East Germany . Under pressure from Wehner , still the main SPD power-broker , and disheartened by the reluctance of others ( notably Hans-Dietrich Genscher , then interior minister ) to shoulder any of the blame for the resulting debacle , Brandt impulsively accepted complete responsibility . He resigned from office . By staying on as SPD chairman , Brandt hoped to foster party unity . In fact , the relationship gradually worsened with the other members of the SPD leadership - the increasingly neurotic Wehner , and Helmut Schmidt . As Schmidt became a target of SPD left-wingers opposing his course on defence , nuclear energy and the economy , the chancellor accused Brandt of countering party discipline by encouraging the cause of younger radicals . After the SPD went into opposition in 1982 , and lost two general elections in 1983 and 1987 , it became clear that Brandt himself had contributed to the party 's sense of drift . In March 1987 a somewhat mindless row brought his downfall as party chairman . His attempt to hire as SPD press officer an able political scientist - a young woman , Greek-born , above all a non-party member - proved too daring for some party stalwarts . Badly piqued , the patriarch ( who would have bowed out anyway in 1988 ) announced that he was stepping down . In a emotional two-hour farewell address at Bonn 's Beethoven Hall in June 1987 , Brandt declared that his brand of libertarian social democracy was one where the leader would make mistakes . ' I have not always considered what should be considered . I am sorry . And that is it . ' Conditioned by the threat Germany had once posed to its neighbours and to itself , Brandt spent his life looking several ways at once . His greatest service was to show that a certain ambiguity could buttress Germany's position in the world rather than undermine it . His greatest regret may have been to have died before he - or anyone else - could be completely sure that the unification of the German nation would turn out an unmitigated success .