SOUTH Korea said yesterday it would cancel annual military exercises with the US , following a pledge from North Korea to allow inspection of its nuclear facilities . The two steps , which appear to have been co-ordinated , will help ease tensions between North and South Korea . They are the latest signs of a rapprochement after 38 years of uneasy peace since the 1950-53 Korean war . North Korea has been under increasing international pressure to allow inspection of its nuclear facilities . South Korea and the US , its principal ally , are convinced that North Korea is developing nuclear weapons and that Pyongyang will have completed a nuclear device by 1995 . A statement issued on North Korean state radio yesterday confirmed reports from the International Atomic Energy Agency on Monday that Pyongyang would allow inspection of its nuclear facilities . It is not the first time that North Korea has promised to sign a nuclear safeguards accord and allow inspections . But it is the first time that South Korea has accepted Pyongyang 's sincerity . Seoul is apparently convinced that North Korea will fulfil its promise made during a meeting on December 31 in which the two sides agreed to create a nuclear-free Korean peninsula . The scrapping of annual US-South Korean military excercises , agreed this week between US President George Bush and Mr Roh Tae Woo , his South Korean counterpart , also removes one of North Korea 's principal objections to improved relations with Seoul . North Korea has protested over the annual Team Spirit exercises since they started in 1976 and has frequently suspended confidence-building negotiations with South Korea because of them . Western diplomats in Seoul said they were encouraged by yesterday's announcements but wanted to see promises translated into action . 'It doesn't matter what North Korea says , or even what North Korea signs , ' said one diplomat . 'What matters is what they do , and there is still plenty of scope for frustration regarding the inspection of its nuclear facilities . ' Despite such caution , however , most diplomats said that the process of improving inter-Korean relations was gaining momentum . The two sides have signed a non-aggression pact and are expanding economic links .