PRESIDENT George Bush last night ordered 4,500 soldiers and marines to use 'whatever force is necessary to restore order ' to the riot-torn city of Los Angeles . In a television broadcast to the nation , Mr Bush condemned the two days of violence that followed the acquittal of four Los Angeles policemen accused of beating Mr Rodney King , a black motorist . 'There can be no excuse for the murder , arson , theft or vandalism that have terrorised the people of Los Angeles . The wanton destruction of life and property is not a legitimate protest ' . Mr Bush 's remarks came as the toll of human life , property and business continued to rise . As many as 38 people , almost all black , are reported dead and more than 1,000 injured , making it the second worst race riot in the US this century , after the 47 killed in Detroit in 1967 . Yesterday disturbances spread to several other US cities , including Las Vegas , where the National Guard has been called out , San Francisco , New York , Atlanta and Seattle . None assumed the proportions of what has happened in Los Angeles , although the police in San Francisco made some 1,400 arrests . In New York last night hundreds of black , white and Hispanic protesters rampaged through the streets of Lower Manhattan . They broke windows and smashed taxis as riot police attempted to stop them . Several people were arrested . President Bush said he had found the videotape of Mr King 's beating 'revolting , ' but urged Americans to respect the process of law , 'whether or not we agree with the outcome . ' 'The verdict on Wednesday was not the end of the process , ' he said . 'Federal action in this case will be expeditious and will be fair . It will not be driven by mob violence . ' Mr Bush 's order had the effect of activating 3,000 infantry and 1,500 marines that had been on standby since morning . They may now fan out into the streets of Los Angeles . He said he had committed the troops - from a staging area near the riot-torn city - and 5,200 state National Guard forces already on under federal control because 'incidents of random lawlessness and terror ' were still going on . He said the troops and guards had been placed under a single , unified command under the overall supervision of General Colin Powell , the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . Mr Rodney King , whose videotaped beating by police officers set off the rioting , yesterday made an emotional appeal for a return to calm . ' I just want to say : can we all get along ? Can we stop making it horrible for the older people and the kids ? We 'll get our justice . They 've won the battle but they have n't won the war , ' he said . Although the officers who beat Mr King were acquitted on criminal charges of assault , Mr King still has a civil lawsuit pending against them . In addition , Mr William Barr , the US attorney general , said a federal investigation of the possible violation of Mr King 's civil rights was being 'aggressively pursued ' . Estimates of damage in Los Angeles were reported by the Mayor 's office to be as high as Dollars 550m ( Pounds 310m ) . Yesterday sporadic rioting and looting spread to parts of Los Angeles unaffected on the first night , including Hollywood and Beverly Hills , and a thick pall of smoke from hundreds of fires still hung over the whole area . Some of the sharpest confrontations centred on Koreatown , about two miles west of the downtown area . Korean shopowners armed themselves with pistols and rifles and shot at bands of looters marauding through the streets . In Seoul , President Roh Tae-woo called for additional protection for Korean natives in Los Angeles . The focus of violence began to change early yesterday from looting to attacks on the police . Three policemen were shot and a paint factory , daubed with anti-police graffiti , was set on fire . All schools in Los Angeles were ordered to close again in spite of concerns that young people , who might otherwise be at school , were roving the streets and adding to the problems . Mr Bush 's decision to deploy extra resources was taken after two White House meetings , the first of which involved his domestic advisers , including Gen Powell , chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , and the second with black civil rights leaders . Mr Marlin Fitzwater , the presidential spokesman , repeated the president's call for 'understanding and reason ' saying 'anarchy must not prevail ' . The president 's approach to what has happened in Los Angeles is fraught with political risk in this election year . On Thursday he had expressed a similar 'understanding ' for those frustrated by the verdict in the King case and promised an investigation that could lead to a federal prosecution of the acquitted policemen . But he later spoke only of the threat to law and order posed by violence and it is now far from clear that a federal prosecution will materialise . Mr Bill Clinton , his likely Democrat opponent in the presidential election , has also had to fine-tune some of his comments . VIOLENCE IN THE US Page 3 Tough action to quell anarchy across US Politicians take common line across race and party divide Black leaders demand action from Bush Page 9 America 's racial tensions at snapping point