a drug that destroys tumour cells without harming healthy tissues - has been one of the longest-postponed promises of medical research . Now at last , after four decades of patchy progress , several candidate bullets are undergoing clinical trials and they could be available commercially within five years . The idea of using the immune system to create antibodies specific enough to seek out and eliminate disease-causing cells , without doing any other damage , was proposed 90 years ago by the German microbiologist Paul Ehrlich . And anti-cancer antibodies linked to radioactive iodine were first tested in the 1950s at the Memorial-Sloan Kettering Institute in the US . There were a few promising experiments during the 1950s and 1960s but the 'polyclonal ' mixtures of antibodies available at the time did not give reliable results . The real excitement started in the late 1970s , after scientists at the MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology in Cambridge discovered how to make pure 'monoclonal ' antibodies . Researchers could then produce large quantities of identical antibodies , all designed to home in on a single target . The first generation of antibody-based cancer products is now reaching the market . They are magic paints rather than magic bullets - diagnostic tests to give doctors a more accurate image of the tumour than traditional methods such as physical examination or X-rays . The tests contain antibodies which bind to proteins that are found only on a specific type of cancer cell ; they are linked to radioactive isotopes whose radiation is detected outside the body with a special camera . The first such test to receive marketing approval - an imaging agent for colo-rectal cancer produced by Cytogen of New Jersey - went on sale in Europe at the end of last year . Although the US Food and Drug Administration has not yet licensed an antibody-based cancer imaging test , several are expected to receive FDA approval within the next year or so , including one for lung cancer from NeoRx of Seattle . The development of antibody-based drugs , designed not to show up cancer cells but to destroy them , has been slower . However a variety of drugs are now in clinical trials , following recent progress towards overcoming some of the problems that held up research during the 1980s . Monoclonal antibodies were originally made from mouse cells which provoked an unwanted immune response in patients . As a result , many of the antibodies were destroyed before they reached their target . The solution is to make genetically engineered 'humanised antibodies ' in which only the active site that binds to the cancer cell comes from the mouse and the remainder is human . For example the Campath-1H antibody , developed at Cambridge University and now undergoing clinical trials with Wellcome , the UK drug company , contains only 1 per cent rodent material and does not provoke any adverse reaction . To the immune system , cancer cells look extremely similar to normal cells . There has been a serious shortage of distinctive 'marker ' proteins which distinguish the tumour well enough to make it a clear target for an antibody drug , and some of the early candidates cross-reacted unexpectedly with normal tissues . Steadily , however , researchers are discovering better markers . And once a diagnostic antibody against a distinctive marker has been made , it can often be developed into a drug . Only small quantities of antibodies can reach cells inside solid tumours with poor blood supplies . Researchers are testing various techniques for getting larger amounts of antibody to the site where it is needed . One method is to 'pre-load ' or 'pre-target ' the tumour with a non-toxic marker antibody and then to administer a second antibody to kill the marked cells . The bullets are becoming more lethal . There are three ways in which an antibody-based drug can destroy a cell : knock it out with radiation from an isotope ; poison it with a toxic drug ; or activate the immune system's natural cell-killing mechanism . The problems which exist with all three methods are gradually being tackled . In principle , the most elegant and safest approach is to use the antibody to activate the body 's own killer cells . Wellcome 's Campath-1H , which is now being tested on about 50 lymphoma patients , works in this way . And biotechnology companies are trying different ways of boosting the natural mechanism . For example , Medarex , based in New Jersey , is developing 'bispecific' antibodies - two antibodies joined together , one of which binds to the cancer cell and the other which directs killer cells towards the target . The company plans to test them next year in patients with melanoma , the most lethal skin cancer , and glioma and neuroblastoma , two cancers of the brain and nervous systems . But antibodies on their own are not powerful enough to destroy most solid tumours . For these , the antibody has to be linked to a radioactive isotope - the traditional approach - or to a toxin . Then there is a risk of serious side effects if the warhead becomes detached before reaching its target ; much research effort over the past 15 years has been devoted to finding ways of joining the isotope or toxin firmly to the antibody without interfering with its power to bind to cancer cells . Several different isotopes are being tested , including iodine-131 , yttrium-90 , astatine-211 and indium-111 . NeoRx is developing products based on rhenium-186 , starting with an ovarian cancer treatment . The range of powerful drugs and toxins linked to experimental antibodies is even greater . A favourite is ricin , one of the most powerful plant toxins known - a single molecule will kill a cell . Companies developing ricin-linked antibodies include ImmunoGen of Massachusetts , whose Oncolysin B has been tested on leukaemia and lymphoma patients , and ICI of the UK , whose D0490 is about to start clinical trials . Celltech of the UK and American Cyanamid of the US are collaborating on another promising project : an antibody linked to calicheamicin , a potent cytotoxic drug derived originally from fungi . It is due to begin clinical studies in leukaemia and breast cancer patients within the next few months . An alternative approach , pioneered by Kenneth Bagshawe at London 's Charing Cross Hospital , with funding from the Cancer Research Campaign , is Antibody-Directed Enzyme/Prodrug Therapy ( Adept ) . This is a two-stage process : the patient is treated first with an antibody linked to a bacterial enzyme and later with a 'prodrug ' - a chemical that is relatively non-toxic but is converted by the enzyme into a potent cell-killing drug . Small-scale clinical trials of Adept treatments against colo-rectal cancer have been taking place for the past 18 months , in collaboration with ICI . Despite the recent progress , however , more research is required to hone antibodies into reliable cancer drugs . 'Antibody engineering ' will make it possible to design artificial antibodies - far smaller and more accurate bullets than anything available today . Another possibility is to use a hormone or growth factor instead of an antibody to guide toxins to receptor sites on cancer cells . The company pioneering this approach is Seragen , based in Massachusetts , which is testing a range of 'fusion toxins ' , consisting of diphtheria toxins linked to interleukin or epidermal growth factor . Since conventional chemotherapy , radiation and surgery still fail to cure most tumours , there is a potential market for innovative cancer treatments worth several billion dollars a year . Although new genetic technologies - anti-sense drugs and gene therapy - offer a promising alternative , magic bullet enthusiasts will be disappointed if they are not selling at least Dollars 2bn a year worth of cancer drugs within a decade . The series continues next month with a look at heart drugs . -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- FORECAST WORLD MARKETS FOR ANTIBODY-BASED CANCER TREATMENTS -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- Cancer Potential 1985 sales 2001 sales type market ( dollars m ) ( dollars m ) ( dollars m ) -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- Lung 1,127 0 500 Colorectal 948 95 760 Breast 753 75 550 Lymphoma 213 50 160 Pancreatic 213 0 180 Leukemia 173 50 130 Ovarian 153 30 100 Melanoma 110 20 80 TOTAL 3,690 320 2,450 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- Source : Cest -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --