TWO Palestinians were wounded yesterday when Israeli-backed militiamen fired warning shots to stop about 415 deportees stranded in a Middle East no-man's land from re-entering Israeli-held territory . As the deadlock between Lebanon and Israel over the fate of the deportees continued , Mr Yitzhak Rabin , the Israeli prime minister , told parliament in Jerusalem his government was firm in its resolve not to let them return . ' I confess there is no pity for them in my heart , ' he said . In Beirut , the Lebanese government repeated that it was not responsible for the expelled Palestinians . And Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik al-Hariri told humanitarian organisations they could no longer provide emergency aid . The Israeli High Court adjourned until today its consideration of a petition by civil rights lawyers to force the government to rescind the deportations . In the US , General Colin Powell , chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , added his voice to the US administration 's criticism of the expulsions . 'Counterviolence and deportations are not the answer we need to Israel's legitimate security needs , ' General Powell told a Jewish audience at Yeshiva University in New York . Earlier , the deportees , expelled last week for their alleged links to Islamic fundamentalist groups which had shot dead six Israeli soldiers , were ordered by Lebanese troops to leave their makeshift camp in no-man 's land in south-eastern Lebanon and return southwards to Israeli-controlled territory . Reporters at the scene said the South Lebanon Army , which is armed and controlled by Israel , twice opened fire around the deportees and over their heads with tank shells , mortars and heavy machineguns when they came within several hundred yards of SLA positions at Zemraya on the edge of Israel's Lebanese 'security zone ' . At nightfall , the deportees were said to have moved back towards their tent encampment in the area between the Israeli and Lebanese armies to spend a fifth successive night . The SLA planted mines to prevent another attempted crossing and received water cannon and teargas . Mr Rabin told the Knesset he would not be swayed by what he said was an attempt to prove 'that these terrorists are unprotected and should be pitied . ' He said the expulsions were part of a fight against Islamic extremists pledged to destroy the Middle East peace process . Mr Rabin said he was convinced the peace negotiations would resume , despite a suspension of the talks by the Palestine Liberation Organisation . But the head of the Palestinian delegation to the talks , Mr Faisal Husseini , said the immediate issue was securing the return of the deportees , not setting a date for renewed talks . Beirut holds firm , Page 3