THE RULES that determine capital gains tax , the tax you pay on profits from investments , are complicated and frequently illogical . CGT can apply to profits made from the sale of such investments or possessions as : shares of all forms , unit trusts , valuable items such as antiques , and property ( other than your main residence ) . You do not pay anything unless your net gain for the tax year exceeds a threshold of Pounds 5,500 , which excludes most people . Nor can you be taxed until you have sold your investment and realised a capital gain . So you do not pay CGT if your shares have had a great year but you are still holding on to them . Nor are you taxed on any investments which have not kept track with inflation . You are taxed only on the amount by which your investment has beaten the retail prices index ( RPI ) . This is known as the indexation allowance . Its calculation is complicated , but each month the Inland Revenue releases new tables that show how much RPI has risen for every month since March 1982 . These are published monthly in the Weekend FT. An example will illustrate the process . Assume that you had bought shares at a total cost of Pounds 5,000 in September 1984 . The indexation value in December 1991 was 1.506 - in other words , prices had increased by around 50 per cent since 1984 . You would therefore multiply Pounds 5,000 by 1.506 to find your indexed cost if you had sold . This would have come to Pounds 7,530 . Had you sold your shares in December , whether you made a taxable gain or a loss would have depended on whether the proceeds were above or below Pounds 7,530 . If you made no other capital gains during the current tax year , then the proceeds could have been as much as Pounds 13,030 ( the indexation allowance of Pounds 7,530 , plus the threshold of Pounds 5,500 ) before you needed to pay any CGT . Broking and dealing costs can be taken into account in calculating your CGT base costs and sale proceeds . Gains can be offset against losses elsewhere in your portfolio . Shares which have risen in value since you bought them can still count as losses after indexation . If , after indexation , gains outweigh losses in your portfolio by less than Pounds 5,500 for a year , you pay no CGT . CGT does not affect income from investments - such as the dividend on shares , or the rent from second houses . These are taxed as income . But your top income tax rate ( and the size of your income if you are a basic-rate taxpayer ) determines the rate of CGT you have to pay . How can you minimise CGT ? One of the most important techniques is the 'bed & breakfast ' deal , where you sell shares one afternoon and buy them back the following morning . The transaction costs involved are not negligible , so you should take the advice of brokers and accountants before doing this . B & B deals are most useful when you have already made gains in the current tax year which take you over the threshold . A B & B deal to establish a loss elsewhere in your portfolio can save you a specific amount of tax , which you know you would otherwise have had to pay . You can also use B & B deals to take your gains for the year up to the threshold . This is more speculative . It may save you tax in the future , but it may not ; so look carefully at the brokers ' fees and the likely overnight price spread before going to market . Some gilt unit trusts , which hold a proportion of international bonds , provide CGT-efficient investments . They invest in bonds which pay out high interest but are unlikely to grow in value . This can provide you with a high income , and also establish a loss for CGT purposes to be offset against gains elsewhere in your portfolio . A final irritating point to note : as the result of an attempt to simplify the tax , all gains and losses on investments bought before April 6 , 1982 have now been rebased to March 31 , 1982 . In theory , any gains made on investments before that date have effectively been written off . In practice , this move has added many new complexities . If you are holding on to shares from a long time back , you should take the advice of an accountant about rebasing . CGT is so unpopular at present that Labour 's plans have not caused much political controversy , but it is as well to note that the rules might change if there were a change of government . The threshold would come down by Pounds 1,000 or more , and there might also be an increase in the rate charged . Labour wants a reform to encourage long-termism - the rate of tax paid would grow less , the longer the investment were held . Thus , short-term stock market 'stagging ' would be penalised .