THE HUMAN BLUEPRINT by Robert Shapiro Cassell Pounds 16.99 , 432 pages THE CODE OF CODES edited by DJ Kevles and L. Hood Harvard Pounds 23.95 , 396 pages ONE OF the most important programmes of scientific research everdevised is under way , in a massive cooperative effort in laboratories around the world . It is the Human Genome Project , and it concerns nothing less than the nature of man . In his entertainingly clear account , Robert Shapiro explains what it is and explores the exciting and sometimes alarming possibilities it offers . Genome research is the province of that department of biological science called genetics . Genetics is the investigation of how organisms bequeath anatomical , physiological and behavioural traits to their offspring , and how such traits express themselves in the formation and development of individual organisms . Central to this inquiry is the concept of the gene , a chemical packet of information which is the fundamental unit of heredity . The word 'gene ' was coined in 1909 , but the idea dates back to the work of the 19th century monk Gregor Mendel , who studied heredity in sweet peas and proposed a mechanism by which characteristics are passed between generations . Little more than a century has elapsed since Mendel 's day , but genetics has proved to be one of the most important sciences in history . The sum of all genetic material in a given organism is called the 'genome ' . It is a hugely complex chemical storehouse of information , a code or script in which is written the secrets of every physical aspect of a living creature . The quantity of information in a single human genome is equivalent to the amount of data in a thousand telephone directories each a thousand pages long . When scientists can read the code , they will have information about an individual 's genetic make-up which will reveal not only his heredity ( for example , which forebears bequeathed him his height , colouring and other traits ) , but something of his fate also - for example , the diseases he has or might be prone to , and the possibility of his offspring inheriting these or those characteristics and conditions . Genetics has already explained much and made many things possible , especially in medicine , where it has proved itself a powerful tool . Transplant surgery , prenatal diagnosis , cancer treatments , the manufacture of insulin for treatment of diabetics : all would be impossible without genetics . Genetics is crucial in cystic fibrosis research and the attempt to understand Alzheimer 's disease . But these advances are based on limited and partial knowledge of the human genome , which until recently presented too large a task for more than piecemeal investigation . Thanks to brilliant recent discoveries about how to read the genetic code , together with the bold imagination and resolve of scientists prepared to work together on a long-term international project , the limits on scientific understanding of the genome are being pushed back . At a meeting in San Diego , California , in October 1989 , the Human Genome Project was launched , scheduled to take 15 years and promised Dollars 3bn by the US government over that period . With the right techniques established , and high-powered computer technology available , there is excitement among the researchers . What has been described as the 'holy grail ' of human genetics is close at hand . James Watson , one of the discoverers of DNA and the Genome Project 's head , has said : ' A more important set of instruction books will never be found by human beings . When finally interpreted , the genetic messages encoded within our DNA will provide the ultimate answers to the chemical underpinnings of human existence . ' Shapiro takes us through the detective story of how genetics developed , and lucidly explains the nature of the genome and the task of investigating it . In the collection of essays edited by Kevles and Hood the same terrain is covered , but more technically . Both books make admirable and successful efforts to equip general readers with a clear grasp of the issues - an important matter , because the future of genome research prompts a number of difficult questions . This is illustrated by both books when they turn from explanation of the genome project to the consequences of its successful completion . Armed with so much genetic knowledge , will we be tempted to manipulate the genetic material of future people not just to exclude hereditary diseases , but to make them taller , more intelligent , more athletic ? Should employers know the genetic profile of potential employees , some of whom they might refuse to employ because they have , say , a genetic risk of early death from heart disease ? What policies should we adopt now to cope with the taxing choices we shall soon have to make , now that all this knowledge is rushing upon us ? Shapiro , and the contributors to the Kevles and Hood volume , issue us with an invitation to reflect on these questions while there is still time .