LEADING British industri-alists yesterday voiced fears that the rise of sterling to Dollars 2 would worsen the recession . Mr Martin Taylor , chief executive of Courtaulds Textiles , said the fall in the dollar would cost his company several million pounds a year . 'It is the biggest problem in the industry for five years , ' he said . 'The European currency bloc is ridiculously overvalued . ' Jaguar , which last year had 44 per cent of its sales in the US , described the dollar rate as preposterous . Mr David Boole , director of public affairs , said : 'For Jaguar as an operating unit the exchange rate is a disaster . Our cars have little US content . It is still the problem of making cars in pounds and selling them in dollars . ' Mr Peter Bates , sales and marketing director of the Savoy hotel group , said : 'There is no doubt that it is very expensive for an American to come here at the moment . ' The number of guests from the US , who account for 50 per cent of the group's customers , has fallen by 10 per cent . Since last November American guests at the group 's hotels have been offered rooms at a fixed exchange rate of Dollars 1.70 to the pound . Other companies were less worried . The automotive component maker T & N said the dollar rate was 'not much of a problem in real terms ' . Mr Colin Hope , T & N chairman and chief executive , said : 'Our US companies are virtually currency neutral in terms of their balance sheets and borrowings . We do not export much to the US from Europe now since we have big US manufacturing operations . GEC , the electronics group which has extensive operations in the US , said the strength of sterling would be only marginally more negative than positive . Smiths Industries , the aerospace company which has plants in the US and UK , said the currency change was a factor in deciding where to locate new production . But Mr Christopher Taylor , finance director , said : 'Sales into dollar economies which are being delivered now were sold at much better than the present rate . And the forward rate over two years for new deals is more like Dollars 1.80 . ' Mr Taylor also pointed out that the group hedged its dollar exposure . Courtaulds Textiles ' Mr Martin Taylor said this did not apply in his company 's case . 'You ca n't hedge economic disadvantage . Imports come in from countries with a dollar cost base like the Far East . It is n't about exports , it 's about import competition . ' Mr Donald Anderson , chief economist at chemicals company Courtaulds , said the effect of the cheap dollar was limited by long-term contracts and high barriers to entry in its markets . But he said 'the dollar is a problem when we translate our profits into sterling ' . Computer manufacturers said the impact of the falling dollar was broadly neutral . Most computer components - microprocessors , disk drives and power supplies - are bought in dollars . The slight advantage this will give non-US suppliers , however , will quickly be countered by the lower cost of complete US-made systems . Dr Peter Horne , chairman of Apricot Computers , the UK-based workstation manufacturer owned by Mitsubishi of Japan , which turned over Pounds 45m last year , said it might mean an extra 1 per cent or 2 per cent on gross profit margins , but the effect would be swamped by the savage price-cutting which characterises the global personal computer business . Mr Stan Boland , treasurer for ICL , owned by Fujitsu of Japan , said the company bought components for its personal computers and mid-range systems in dollars , but hedged against currency fluctuations by means of forward contracts and options . Blue Circle , Britain 's biggest cement manufacturer , said : 'We operate as a local producer rather than an exporter . We have not repatriated profits in recent years but have re-invested them in the US cement and concrete businesses . All our US borrowings are matched against US assets . We are less vulnerable , therefore , to currency fluctuations . ' Some other companies said that conditions were so bad in the US that the dollar 's weakness made little difference . One UK group with housebuilding and aggregates interests in the US said : 'It would be nice to have enough US profits to be adversely affected by currency movements . ' For one group of companies the move is good news . Travel operators say that prices of holidays to the US have come down . Prices to other destinations have also eased because the travel companies pay for their aircraft fuel in dollars . Mr Roger Heape , managing director of British Airways Holidays , said that the state of the dollar had allowed the company to offer 1993 holidays at prices 6 per cent lower than this year . BA Holidays has been able to introduce new holiday programmes to the US west coast , New England and the north-east .