THE END-of-tax-year 'harvest season ' for financial products is almost upon us . You need to make many important decisions , but try to keep your head while all salesmen around you are losing theirs . Here are 10 taxing topics to think about : Pensions and Additional Voluntary Contributions . If you want to put the full 15 per cent of your salary into a pension this tax year , you should top up your company pension with an AVC . Pension contributions offer one of the most tax-effective forms of long-term investment . Remember that when you reach retirement can not take a lump sum from a ( post-1987 ) AVC but must buy an annuity . A personal equity plan offers more flexibility . Personal Equity Plans . The survey contained in this issue of the Quarterly Review has all the necessary information about Pep investment . Suffice to say that if you have Pounds 6,000 to spare , a managed unit or investment trust Pep ( one that combines trusts with additional shares ) might make sense , and if you have a large portfolio of equities , you should probably transfer holdings up to the annual limit into a tax-free plan . Delay until April and you have excluded yourself from Pounds 9,000 in tax-free investment . Business Expansion Scheme . To take advantage of this valuable tax concession then , again , you must act before April . It is best to do deals before Budget day , to be on the safe side . This applies in particular to the covenanted buy-back companies , which are widely tipped for abolition . Tax-exempt Special Saver Accounts . These require no particular action before the end of the tax year . However , if you started a Tessa at the beginning of last January , now is the time to top up with this year 's instalment of Pounds 1,800 . Enterprise Zones . The very wealthy might consider investing in commercial property in enterprise zones . You receive full tax relief at your top marginal rate on EZ investments , and there is no upper limit on the amount you can invest . You can also effectively obtain tax relief on loans taken out to finance an EZ investment , if you pay for them with rental income from the property . If you have a lot of money to shelter from tax , EZs probably offer the best way to do it , but do not proceed without advice . Interest on saving accounts . Following last year 's abolition of composite rate tax ( CRT ) on interest on bank and building society accounts , non-taxpayers need no longer pay any tax on these accounts . If you are already registered as a non-taxpayer you do not need to re-register . But if you have not already registered , you should do so . If you , or your spouse , have ceased to pay income tax this year ( through redundancy or retirement , for example ) you need to claim exemption from the beginning of the next tax year . Leaflet IR 111 , 'How to Claim Repayments of Tax on Bank and Building Society Interest ' and form R 95 are available from your local tax office . Bed & breakfasting . If your portfolio is likely to make gains above the Pounds 5,500 capital gains tax threshold , you might benefit from a bed & breakfast deal . A B & B deal involves selling a share one afternoon and buying it back the following morning . In the process , you take a gain or loss for this tax year . If you have already taken more than Pounds 5,500 in gain this year , it might be worth doing a B & B deal to establish a loss elsewhere in your portfolio . This way you can still avoid paying CGT this year . Also , you can B & B stocks which are doing well in order to limit the gains on which you will eventually pay tax , although this is more speculative , and the dealing costs might cut into the tax saving . It is important to use an accountant , unless your broker is one of those who provide all the documentation you need in time to make B & B deals . All gains and losses should be calculated after indexation . Inheritance Tax . Current legislation allows you to give away up to Pounds 3,000 to a single individual each year free of inheritance tax . You can also carry forward unused gift allowances from last year , but you must use this year 's Pounds 3,000 first . Also , you can only carry forward one year - after that , the exemption is lost . If you gave nothing away last year , you can give away Pounds 6,000 this year . However , if you only gave away Pounds 3,000 this year , you would be treated as using up this year 's allowance , and would have no extra to carry forward for next year . You can also make gifts up to Pounds 250 to as many different people as you like , free of IHT . Charitable giving . Now is the time to make a Gift Aid donation . If you give Pounds 600 or more to a charity , it will be 'grossed up ' . Therefore , if you part with Pounds 600 , the charity , after 25 per cent tax has been added , will receive Pounds 800 . If you are a top-rate taxpayer , you then receive 15 per cent ( the difference between the top and basic rates ) . In this example , that is Pounds 120 . So you spend a net Pounds 480 to make a donation of Pounds 800 . You can also enroll on a payroll Give As You Earn scheme for next year . Offshore Trusts . This is a very abstruse area , on which you should seek accounting and legal advice before taking any action . However , Edmund Wood , of BDO Binder Hamlyn , points out that sweeping changes made by last year's budget could require action in this tax year if you do not want to miss out . Following the changes , when capital payments are made from an offshore trust to a UK beneficiary , capital gains tax must be paid on them . However , from next tax year onwards there will be a supplemental charge of 10 per cent per annum . So , if you are considering making such a payment before long , Mr Wood points out that it would be wise to make the payment before , rather than after , April 5 .