THE US Forest Service is to change its forest management philosophy in a move that could sharply alter logging practices and help to revive indigenous tree species almost wiped out by rapidly-growing softwoods . Mr Dale Robertson , service chief , has instructed regional foresters to start to manage the 191m acres of national forest under their authority as 'dynamic and complex eco-systems , ' instead of concentrating on maximising timber production . The new policy is to lead to a 70 per cent reduction in clear-cutting , where loggers clear an entire area of trees and brush , and to a greater use of less intensive logging techniques that leave some trees standing . At the moment , clear-cutting is used on about a third of the 800,000 to 900,000 acres harvested each year in national forests , and accounts for a much higher proportion of timber volume . The Forestry Service also aims to restore traditional North American tree species , including east coast hardwoods and the western ponderosa pine , which has been largely superseded by faster-growing species such as Douglas fir and lodgepole pine . Forestry officials said reduction of clear-cutting would lead to a short-term drop of about 10 per cent in timber volume harvested , but added that volumes would return to their previous levels over time , through development that pays attention to variations in tree maturities . Stable volumes would imply logging on larger acreages . This might be difficult because of environmental challenges to logging of any kind on vast areas of national forest land that shelter endangered species of wildlife . Even so , some foresters argue there is ample scope for sustaining volumes by thinning existing forests . The exact consequences of the new eco-system in forest management policy are difficult to predict , especially as it is by no means clear that Mr Robertson will be allowed to proceed with his policy change by President George Bush . He likes to call himself the 'environmental president ' but his administration has usually considered timber industry jobs more important than ecological concerns . Industry officials argue that clear-cutting is not just the cheapest way to harvest trees , but also the best way to ensure replanting . 'It 's cheaper , but it is also often the best way to get regeneration , ' said Ms Anne Heissenbuttel , director of forest planning and policy at the National Forest Products Association . However , Mr Neil Sampson , executive vice-president of American Forests , a conservation organisation , says that the Robertson memorandum would represent a dramatic shift from the European philosophy of treating forests as agricultural factories by planting acres of single softwood species . 'It 's not a non-economic view of forest management - it 's a view which says people may not be powerful enough or smart enough to replace a natural forest with an artificial forest , ' he said .