Conscious of the weight of history bearing down on him , Japan 's Emperor Akihito carefully delivers each of his pre-scripted public words , punctuating the sentences with uncomfortably long silences and filtering the emotion from a voice still ascribed supernatural qualities . His tones will be more carefully measured than usual when he arrives in China tomorrow for the first visit by a Japanese emperor . The humble Akihito has made clear a sense of deep privilege that his reign should be chosen for this journey . The emperor 's most obvious task will be to deal with the relatively recent past , the invasion of China during the 1930s and 1940s , by delivering an unambiguous apology and , perhaps , clearing the way for an era in which the economic potential of the relationship will finally overcome the bitter memories . For the Communist party leaders who invited the emperor , the six-day visit has a less lofty , more immediate purpose . They are still in the process of convincing the Chinese people that the regime has the respect of the international community , and any foreign dignitary has been much appreciated since the Tiananmen crackdown of 1989 . In these circumstances , a visit by the emperor is all the more welcome . The Chinese government is also keen to attract Japanese investment , a controversial issue during the early 1980s when the revolutionary elders drew comparisons between Japanese joint ventures in northern China and the occupation of Manchuria in the 1930s , an occupation begun in the name of the then Emperor Hirohito , father of Akihito . It is a sign of the changed times that six leading trading houses , including Mitsubishi Corp and Mitsui & Co yesterday announced a plan to build a Dollars 4bn petrochemical complex in the northern Chinese province of Liaoning . Japanese trading houses are also developing an industrial park in the northern city of Dalian , and a Japanese trucking company has announced plans for a transportation network in the north . In the year of the Akihito visit , the 20th anniversary of the restoration of Sino-Japanese relations , China will become Japan 's second-largest trading partner , behind the US , and up from fifth place a year ago . Japanese investment in China , which rose from Dollars 349m in 1990 to Dollars 579m last year , is likely to double this year , as manufacturers bruised by falling profits source more of their components in low-cost and increasingly reliable China . The emperor is certain to laud this developing bilateral economic relationship . But the flow of funds and an apology from the emperor are not likely to appease a Chinese people raised on horrific tales of the 'burn all , loot all , kill all ' policies of the Japanese military during the second world war . Detailing the brutality of that period has served the Communist party's interests as it highlights the 'heroic ' role of revolutionary-era soldiers , one of whom , Deng Xiaoping , is now an emperor himself in everything but name . In deference to the Japanese emperor , Beijing has barred protests by private groups seeking war compensation from Japan and taken much newspaper space to explain the new , non-political role of Akihito . Japan 's foreign ministry is also emphasising the 'non-political ' role of the emperor , as enshrined in the constitution , and arguing that the event is nothing more than a 'goodwill visit ' . This interpretation is questioned by some sceptical members of the ruling Liberal Democratic party . Evidence of the relationship 's rich and complex history is shown in the varied opposition from left , right and middle-ground groups in Tokyo . There are complaints that the timing of the visit violates the emperor's 'non-political ' status and about the flattering of a discredited Chinese leadership . Then there is concern that the exalted Japanese emperor is travelling to 'pay tribute ' . Even at the height of Chinese influence over the past two millennia , during which Japan imported a written language and the essence of its spiritual and philosophic beliefs , no emperor crossed the sea to Beijing .