AIR TRAFFIC is continuing to recover from its depressed levels of last year , according to figures released yesterday , but the civil aviation industry is still struggling to climb out of recession . BAA , the former British Airports Authority , reported that passenger traffic at its eight airports increased by 3.1 per cent to 5.5m passengers last month compared with December 1990 . British Airways also reported continued recovery in traffic last month with a 0.3 per cent rise compared with the same month of 1990 . Although the latest BAA and BA statistics have confirmed a tentative recovery in air traffic after the collapse caused by the Gulf war and the recession , airline yields remain under severe pressure because of the intense competition in the airline business . One of the reasons for the rise in air traffic is the significant discounts on fares being offered by international carriers . The discounts have depressed the carriers ' yields . The latest BAA figures showed that the traffic on UK domestic routes was still 1.6 per cent below 1991 's level , reflecting the effects of the recession on domestic air travel . Against that , all other markets showed an increase . European scheduled traffic increased by 1.1 per cent and European charter traffic was 10 per cent higher . North Atlantic and other long-distance routes rose by 6.6 per cent and 6.3 per cent last month compared with December 1990 . Overall , BAA handled a total of 69.59m passengers last year , a 6.2 per cent decline compared with 1990 . Much of that increase has arisen from the opening of Stansted 's new terminal last spring . Passenger traffic there increased by nearly 46 per cent to 1.68m people . At Heathrow airport passengers declined by 5.6 per cent to 40.25m last year , while at Gatwick it declined by 11.2 per cent to 18.69m . BA 's figures also showed growth in air traffic restricted to intercontinental services , with the domestic UK and European markets still contending with sluggish demand . That pattern is further confirmed by the latest traffic statistics released by the Association of European Airlines ( AEA ) . Those showed an increase of 3.6 per cent in overall international passenger traffic in November 1991 compared with November 1990 but a 1.1 per cent decline in European traffic . The AEA , which groups 22 European carriers , said the fall in European passenger traffic was a reflection not only of the persistent economic recession but also of the impact of Yugoslavia 's civil war on air travel .