On Burma 's western border , Moslem refugees fleeing persecution are streaming into Bangladesh at the rate of 5,000 a day . On the eastern border , Thai forces are on alert and another refugee exodus is feared . In Rangoon , the capital , one of the world 's most authoritarian regimes is relentlessly tightening its hold on power . Mrs Khaleda Zia , prime minister of Bangladesh , is this week visiting the US to ask President George Bush and the United Nations Security Council to intervene in the refugee crisis . At least 200,000 Moslems , known as Rohingyas , from Burma 's western Arakan state , are living in makeshift camps in Bangladesh . They have fled the Burmese army which , according to their detailed and consistent accounts , has unleashed a terrifying campaign of rape , torture , killing and forced evictions to make them leave . Close to the border with Thailand , Burmese forces are engaged in another fierce offensive against ethnic minorities , as Karen rebels , who have been joined by other opposition groups , grimly defend their base at Manerplaw . Thai fighter pilots have been ordered to attack Burmese aircraft which enter Thailand 's air space in pursuit of the rebels , and at the weekend Thai artillery opened fire on Burmese troops which had crossed the border to attack the Karen base from the rear . The attacks on ethnic minorities are part of a drive by Burma 's ruling State Law and Order Restoration Council ( Slorc ) to establish its grip on all walks of life . The military junta took power in 1988 as pro-democracy demonstrations were sweeping the country . It held elections in 1990 , but has ignored their result . It has kept the 1991 Nobel peace prize winner , Aung San Suu Kyi - leader of the opposition party which won a landslide victory in the poll - under house arrest since July 1989 . To try to squash numerous ethnic rebellions on the borders , the military is undergoing a rapid expansion . When the Slorc came to power in 1988 the military was about 180,000-strong . Now it is believed to have more than 250,000 men and that the number will double to some 500,000 by the end of the century . The intention , Burma-watchers say , is to enmesh the army so deeply in the bureaucracy and state institutions that it can never be removed , even if it does one day allow civilians some measure of participation in the political process . Burmese people offer little comment on what the government is doing against the Moslems and Karens . For them the campaigns are just another example of the extremes to which the army is prepared to go to establish total control over the whole of the country . The military government in Rangoon denies allegations of ill-treatment of Moslems and , through the tightly controlled media , accuses foreign news organisations of attacking the country with 'fabricated reports ' . It says the Rohingyas are not one of Burma 's native ethnic groups , and that the refugees are illegal immigrants or ignorant locals who have been lured away by Rohingya 'terrorists ' . Foreign residents in Rangoon say that a big immigration check has been under way in Arakan state and that the military has been expanding its barracks and roads in the area . They say the government has been concerned that members of the Karen ethnic group , which is fighting for its own homeland in south-eastern Burma , have been trying to infiltrate western parts of the country . They fear the possibility of the Karens giving support to separatists there . On the streets of Burma 's slowly decaying cities , few soldiers are visible - an indication , says a foreigner in Rangoon , 'of just how confident they ( the military ) are ' . There are , however , said to be soldiers hidden in many buildings and stationed on the outskirts of the bigger cities , where they can be quickly called on if needed . There are thousands of military informers scattered throughout the population and even the most innocent of conversations is reported . 'The government controls everything , ' says the young driver of a pedal taxi . Nearly two years after the election , the Slorc shows no intention of giving up power . 'Political activity is on hold , ' says one diplomat . 'They 've got the place very , very tightly sewn up . ' Of more than 200 political parties which registered for the May 1990 election , just 32 remain . All are monitored by the authorities ; none is allowed to organise , or even discuss , anti-government activity . Universities are closed and university teachers have been sent on political re-education courses . Many former pro-democracy politicians and student activists have fled the country , and many others are in prison . Amnesty International has identified 1,500 political prisoners by name , and the US State Department has estimated the full number to be about 2,000 . Reports of torture and ill-treatment are common . The government , aware that it is not popular at home , sometimes explains through the newspapers or giant red billboards in the streets that life will get easier as stability returns . The army 'will never betray the national cause ' , one such board reads . It is also aware that it is vulnerable to growing economic discontent , and is seeking to do something about the chaotic economy . Sources in Rangoon say it has drawn up a four-year economic plan . The main aims are to revive exports , increase agricultural productivity and boost efficiency of state enterprises . Shortages of inputs such as fertiliser and electricity will make that difficult . The Slorc is believed to want to encourage joint ventures with foreign companies . However , Burma 's poor international standing and the publicity attracted by persecution of ethnic minorities may make this increasingly difficult . The Slorc ended 26 years of the 'Burmese road to socialism ' when it took power , and announced that there would be an open economy . A foreign investment law was passed , prompting a flurry of activity . Thai companies are involved in logging Burma 's forests ; Singapore , Japan and South Korea have significant involvement in the country ; PepsiCo of the US set up a bottling plant , while Amoco and Unocal of the US , BHP of Australia , Japan's Idemitsu and Shell are among 10 foreign oil companies which signed contracts to work in Burma . However , repatriation of profits requires cabinet approval , bureaucracy is a nightmare and corruption is endemic . Foreign trade has increased substantially , though much of what is available on the streets is the result of rampant smuggling . Not long ago it was impossible to buy a light bulb or a tube of toothpaste , but today shops are full of Chinese , Japanese and western-made goods . Almost anything can be bought at Rangoon 's night markets , and foreign films are popular . Some Burmese have done well out of the new economic openness . 'They are very rich but we do n't know where they get it from , ' says a young restaurant worker who , like most people , is struggling to make a living . Inflation is high - rice prices rose by more than 60 per cent last year - and there is a shortage of petrol at the government pumps while on the black market the price per gallon is six times higher . As a result , transport is scarce . Economic sanctions by foreign countries , say Burmese dissidents living in exile , may be the only way to bring the Slorc down . But though the US and European countries have taken measures to isolate Burma , a full-scale embargo seems a long way away . Telling pressure could be exerted by south-east Asian neighbours . Most have made individual protests , but they have refused to take a united stand . In the absence of strong external pressure and with domestic opposition kept in check , the Slorc seems set to continue its repression .