MY LIFE IN POLITICS by Willy Brandt Hamish Hamilton , Pounds 20 , 498 pages WILLY BRANDT is one of the three great statesmen of postwar Europe . The others are Konrad Adenauer and Charles de Gaulle , to whom Brandt pays tribute - although more to the Frenchman than his fellow German . All three saw the Franco-German relationship as crucial to European peace . Where Brandt differed is that he came of working class origins and belonged to the democratic left almost from the start . No one should underestimate the tribulations of Adenauer and de Gaulle , but Brandt probably had a harder life , as full of downs as ups , and sometimes vilified by his own people . He survived , to develop the fruits of their labours and to make decisive contributions of his own . It is typical of the man that he has produced a somewhat rambling political life . He notes that it is 'simpler to write a book alone than with dozen other people ' . That is what he seems to have done . My Life in Politics is Brandt writing personally rather than another Brandt Report . The book jumps all over the place , starting with the crises in postwar Berlin , reverting to childhood , moving to his role in government , then covering his remarkably long political after-life following his resignation as Federal Chancellor in 1974 . Yet the theme of a peaceful Germany in harmony with its neighbours is never far away . Brandt 's aim was no less than that , and probably no more . German unification would never have come about so quickly without the emergence of Gorbachev . But Brandt 's policy of 'small steps ' helped clear the way , as did the policies of Adenauer and de Gaulle before him . In these memoirs it is impossible not to detect a perceived continuity . Adenauer saw his task as the first federal chancellor in cementing relations with the west and making Germany respectable . He told Brandt that the Soviet Union would not be able to stand up to pressures from both China and the west indefinitely : therefore changes in eastern Europe might come eventually . De Gaulle pondered movement east of the Elbe before most Germans seriously began to contemplate it . Brandt salutes him : 'He had ventured to think Utopian thoughts of a permanently peaceful Europe . . . In his perceptions , he came closer to a whole Europe than any of those who wanted to adapt too fast and too permanently to the postwar landscape . ' What most people outside failed to understand was how firm relations between Bonn and Paris had become . That was particularly true of the British . Brandt tells how George Brown , as foreign secretary , said : 'Willy , you must get us into Europe , so we can take the lead . ' He admits that 'in common with leading British politicians ' he did not see Britain as an essential part of Europe except in times of war . It was France that mattered . So did Poland . While Adenauer thought that Europe stopped at the Elbe and drew the curtains at Magdeburg 'so he did not have to see the steppes of Asia ' , Brandt believed that the same historical rank had to be given to reconciliation between Germans and Poles as between Germans and French . That was one of his great achievements as chancellor . Brandt attaches special importance to place . He thinks that Adenauer was governed by being a Rhinelander and considered himself 'more a west German than simply a German . ' Coming from Lubeck and spending his formative years in voluntary exile in Scandinavia , Brandt was subject to different influences . That affected both his view of Germany and social democracy : he regrets that he has not been given enough credit for his role as a reforming chancellor in domestic policy - following the Swedish model . We should not take the geographical influence too far . Helmut Schmidt came from nearby Hamburg , and did not have the same views on social democracy . Brandt says that the difference there was one of temperament ; both Brandt and Schmidt at times must have both been prickly to work with . There is a bitter chapter on Brandt 's resignation as chancellor after the discovery of an east German spy on his personal staff . He writes now that he should never have gone . That does not accord with his mood of the time , when he seemed exhausted . It is also odd that he should poke fun at Ludwig Erhard for having asked , as economics minister , how much it would cost to buy East Germany from the Russians . After all , that is nearly what happened in the end .