MS RIGOBERTA Menchu Tum , the Guatemalan Indian and human rights activist , yesterday won the 1992 Nobel peace prize . The Nobel committee said Ms Menchu , a 33-year-old Mayan , stood out 'as a vivid symbol of peace and reconciliation across ethnic , cultural and social dividing lines , in her own country , on the American continent and in the world ' . Ms Menchu is the ninth woman to win the Nobel peace prize . Detained Burmese opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi won the award last year . Mr Francis Sejersted , chairman of the Nobel committee , said the award to Ms Menchu - on the 500th anniversary of the arrival of Christopher Columbus in the new world - 'was not a coincidence , but it was not the only factor ' in the selection . Ms Menchu said recently of the anniversary : 'There is nothing to celebrate' as 'the rights of the Indian people continue to be violated ' . She returned to Guatemala last week and has been travelling around the country speaking to indigenous groups and supporters . It remained unclear last night whether she could go to Oslo on December 10 to receive the SKr6.5m ( Pounds 688,750 ) award , diploma and gold medal . Before she gained international recognition as a human rights activist Ms Menchu worked in the cotton fields of Guatemala and as a domestic servant for a wealthy family . Her mother , father and brother were killed for their involvement in indigenous rights movements . Fear of suffering the same fate has forced her to live in self-imposed exile in Mexico City . Ms Menchu said last week she would use the prize to set up a foundation in her father 's memory . Ms Menchu became an international figure when , in 1983 , she published her biography ' I , Rigoberta , ' detailing her experiences in Guatemala 's polarised society . In the book she told of how , during her time as a domestic servant for a rich family , she was expected to have sex with the family 's sons and was fed worse than their dog . 'And they gave me a few beans and some hard tortillas . That hurt very much , that the dog had eaten very well and I did n't deserve the food the dog ate , ' she wrote . ' I , Rigoberta , ' now published in 10 languages , brought the plight of indigenous people to the attention of Mrs Danielle Mitterrand , wife of French President Francois Mitterrand , who became a strong Menchu supporter . Mrs Mitterrand accompanied Ms Menchu to Guatemala last year when , for the first time in a decade , she returned home . Ms Menchu now works with the UN Working Group on Indigenous Populations and the International Indian Treaty Council and spends much of her time in Europe . In 1986 she narrated the film When the Mountains Tremble , a powerful account of the struggles and suffering of her native Quiche people . The committee said that in Ms Menchu 's social and political work , 'she has always borne in mind that the long-term objective of the struggle is peace ' . Mr Sejersted conceded that perhaps not all Ms Menchu 's civil rights efforts were conducted peacefully , but as a whole the committee saw her work as contributing to the development of human rights in a peaceful manner . Despite her international prominence , the Guatemalan government treats Ms Menchu as a pariah and accuses her of belonging to the country 's leftist guerrilla movement .