As Father Christmas harnesses his reindeer on Christmas Eve , retailers up and down the land will be counting their seasonal takings . Christmas is the vital trading period for most non-food retailers in the UK , and some make as much as 90 per cent of their annual profits at this time . 'Christmas makes or breaks the bottom line for almost every retailer , ' says Mr John Richards , retail analyst at County NatWest WoodMac . Five years after retailers first began talking about recession , this year's concern that some troubled retailers could fail if Christmas is poor is likely to prove unfounded . Most large chains have already taken the necessary actions - the likes of Next , Burton and Storehouse have seen their share prices soar this year . A question mark does hang over Ratners , the jewellery group , particularly after the recent sudden resignation of its chief executive . Small independent retailers are less likely to have built up the unwieldy cost structures that have caused headaches for the large chains . Stores in some sectors , such as do-it-yourself , are not heavily dependent on Christmas . Trade this Christmas will be scrutinised for signs of recovery in consumer spending . Yet , however low the level of consumer confidence , a build-up in sales in the weeks leading up to Christmas is guaranteed , as the chart of retail sales shows . In BhS , the Storehouse chain store subsidiary , sales in the peak Christmas trading week are around three times those of the lowest week of the year , and even a 'bad ' Christmas would have a ratio close to that . At Argos , the catalogue store retailer , the five weeks before Christmas provide about a quarter of the year 's volume of sales . Mr Bob Stewart , finance director , says the difference between a 'good ' and 'bad ' Christmas is only a few percentage points in volume terms . Mr Richards says : 'Curiously , there has not been a bad Christmas ( in recent years ) . Last year there was a lot of discounting but there is never an enormous drop in volume . ' The essential question for retailers is whether the high level of sales will translate into high profits . Argos 's quarter of annual sales usually translates into about two-thirds of annual profits . For Ratners , Christmas has represented as much as 90 per cent of annual profits in past years , and Woolworths , part of the Kingfisher group , makes its entire annual profit between October and January . Even a chain such as Boots the Chemist , which sells everyday items bought all year round , makes around half its year 's profits in the Christmas selling period , with W H Smith , the newsagent and stationer , making a third . Sales made at Christmas are highly profitable because of the operational gearing effect of the high fixed overheads in retailing . As the table shows , the peak week 's sales produce a much higher net profit margin on the same gross margin , as fixed overheads are spread equally over the year . Although there are some extra costs in the Christmas period - such as staffing - the net margin is much higher . Every extra transaction makes a higher net margin until , as Mr Stanley Kalms , chairman of Dixons , the electrical retailer , says , 'by Christmas Eve the gross margin comes through to the net ' . Profits depend , though , on the gross margin being held . Mr Robert Shrager , finance director of Dixons , says : 'Christmas is really a matter of expectations versus reality . If you expect it to be bad and it is bad than that 's not bad . But if you expect it to be good and it 's bad , that 's bad . ' If retailers build stocks for Christmas and find they are not selling they will sacrifice margins one way or another . This year they appear to have been cautious about stock levels . In recent Christmases retailers have resorted to price cutting to shift stock . That cuts into margins making the period less profitable than it should have been . Last year there was a general dip in sales in November and by the start of December the discounting was well under way , including the now infamous ploy by Ratners to cut prices by 25 per cent on Saturdays . This year discounting activity appears to be more selective . Most shops will open on the last three or four Sundays before Christmas this year , although Marks and Spencer and John Lewis have taken a principled stand against the trend . Marks and Spencer shops are opening long hours on the other days though , with some in shopping centres staying open until 10pm .