THE MERGER of Kiwi and Cherry Blossom , Britain 's two largest brands of shoe polish , has been blocked by Mr Michael Heseltine , the trade and industry secretary . Following the advice of the Monopolies and Mergers Commission , Mr Heseltine yesterday ordered Sara Lee , the international consumer products group which owns Kiwi , to sell Cherry Blossom . The US company had bought Cherry Blossom and other brands from Reckitt & Colman last October . The MMC - in a report full of implicit condemnation of the slovenliness of dirty shoes - discovered the end of national service more than 30 years ago had contributed to a long-term decline in the shoe polishing habit . The Navy Army and Air Force Institutes - the Naafi - each year still buys more than Pounds 230,000 of shoe polish , mainly Kiwi . That makes it one of the largest customers in a market worth Pounds 13.5m at manufacturers' prices and twice as much at retail . Outside the military , however , the MMC report notes , 'less importance is attached to having well-polished shoes ' these days . The greater use of cars -another modern-day idleness - also meant shoes were less exposed to rain and dirt . Even worse , the traditional leather shoe was being replaced by 'trainers ' and 'sneakers ' which might not be cleaned at all . In this shrinking market , the combined company accounts for 74 per cent of UK sales outside the shoe trade . Fearing a sharp rise in prices , which could take even more of the gloss off Britain 's footwear , the MMC recommended divestment . Professor Patrick Minford , the maverick , free market Liverpool University economist , dissented from his colleagues on the MMC panel . At 49 , just too young to have experienced national service , he gave priority to the interests of 90 workers in Honley , West Yorkshire . Sara Lee said the factory , which makes both brands , might close if it lost the Cherry Blossom business , with production moving to France . Prof Minford argued that the possible loss of jobs in an area of high unemployment would be a 'serious damage to the public interest ' . He said imports of shoe polish could provide alternative supplies to maintain sufficient competition , and the price of shoe polish would be set by the going international rate . Mr Euan Venters , Sara Lee 's marketing director in the UK , said the company was 'surprised and disappointed ' by the decision . MMC takes the shine off shoe polish merger , Page 14