Miss Fischer is a Hungarian pianist-musician of rare , long-matured gifts , and in her Royal Festival Hall recital on Tuesday there were rewards enough to satisfy all those in the audience who have loved and admired her work for decades now . It was nevertheless the wrong venue , and the wrong occasion . She had been enlisted to take the place of Alfred Brendel ( laid low by tendinitis ) in the international piano series , sponsored by Technics Hi-fi . But Miss Fischer is no longer a 'hi-fi ' pianist : she is a distinguished , elderly lady whose technical grip sometimes falters and whose fingers often slip , though her musical instincts remain wonderfully vital . A large part of the audience attracted to a recital-series like this one consists of younger hi-fi listeners , accustomed to nothing less than near-perfect execution - and much disconcerted by wrong notes . She should not have been playing to them , but to an audience of attentive aficionados in , say , the Queen Elizabeth Hall or the Wigmore . That said , I can report that in Schumann and Beethoven she was prodigal as ever with direct , unadorned insights . Schumann 's Kinderszenen , the 'Scenes from Childhood ' , were utterly idiosyncratic : neither child's-eye nor cut-glass , but forthright and urgently felt . Sometimes bumpy , too ; and Miss Fischer chose wilfully to repeat section after section ad libitum - always , of course , with fresh lighting . That composer 's Sonata in F-sharp minor emerged as a seamless lyrical whole , with an impulse so steadily consistent that one barely noticed the breaks between movements . In Beethoven 's Sonata op . 27 no . 2 , the initial 'Moonlight ' Adagio was strong , sonorous , emphatically pointed ; the Scherzo oddly smooth and gracious , its half-staccatos and rests melted away by perpetual pedalling . In the Finale Miss Fischer generated more exciting drama than I 've heard from any pianist in some while . His op . 111 Sonata rose above a lot of finger-slips toward a grand , humane vision . No motorised virtuosity here , nor cosmetically ethereal effects ; but a transparent , unblinking concern for the sense of the whole work . It was a kind of lesson in advanced musical ethics : just what we love Miss Fischer most for .