MANY visiting Spain for the Barcelona Olympics ( July 25 to August 9 ) or Expo '92 in Seville ( until October 12 ) will combine these events with a holiday and see more of the country . Plenty will use Spain 's new EC-funded motorways linking its Mediterranean resorts - and find the road journey much safer and more enjoyable than it used to be . Some , tired of crowds , may explore the inland areas . After all , there are 197,000 square miles of the country , with a population of only 38m spread around it . A number may consider Spain for a second home . There are plenty of smart new buildings and cut-price resales . Some may want to view the results of the much-publicised activities of the mayor of Marbella , Jesus Gil y Gil , in cleaning up the town , tearing down buildings and planting hundreds of palm trees along the roads , at Pounds 1,000 a time . Stories of his television interviews , given in a jacuzzi while wearing his chain of office , do nothing to spoil the legend and may help sell apartments being built by his company , on a plot running down to the Marbella waterfront . Los Cipreses del Mar consists of three blocks in the centre of the town . One white marble confection has a vast marble and smoked mirror foyer . Security is tight and seems to be run entirely by computers . There are pools , garage , restaurant . Every apartment has a hi-fi system . The prices of the balconied flats range from Pounds 300,000 to Pounds 1m . A more relaxed development is the Marina Puente Romano apartments adjacent to the Puente Romano hotel . There are 234 units in three groups . Prices start at Pounds 139,000 for a two-bedroom apartment . A duplex penthouse with its own pool could be Pounds 700,000 . Such projects tend to be targeted at a specific market . This would suit tennis buffs . It has 11 tennis courts and is next to the Manolo Santana tennis club and buyers get free life membership of the club . In the hills nine miles from Marbella , 400 plots are for sale in La Zagaleta country club . Buyers will be able to build detached houses , and play golf on an 18-hole course . There is riding , tennis , swimming , a heliport and a club house , with lounges , bars , restaurants , glittering disco and a pavilion suitable for large-scale entertaining . The 2,000-acre estate was owned by Adnan Khashoggi , the arms dealer . The sumptuously furnished clubhouse was one of his many homes . It is now in the hands of the Spanish bank which repossessed it . Hamptons International has just opened in Marbella , working with established agent Barry Randal-Williams ( London tel 071-493-0222 ; Marbella tel 861-909 ) . These three projects are on its books . Along the coast , Bovis Abroad is having a sale . It is offering properties at La Manga club , near Cartagena ( a long-established golfing and holiday resort ) , at prices reduced by up to 25 per cent . A one-bedroom flat is available at Pounds 36,000 ; a two-bedroom villa with pool , at Pounds 105,000 . 'These are odds and ends we have left over , ' says sales director Charles Weston-Baker . ( Bovis , London Tel 081-422-3488 ) . Above Alicante is Denia , a typical small Spanish resort . It is a cheerful venue for package holidays in summer when its population swells from 28,000 to 150,000 . On the edge of the town , looking into the hills , Bovis has a compact development of terrace houses and flats . There are two swimming pools . Prices start at Pounds 50,000 for a two-bedroom house or flat . Expected high-season rentals : from Pounds 1,300 a month . A glut of apartments in and around Barcelona will be on sale once the Olympics are over and advance offers are being sought . There are stories about blocks of flats in the city collapsing because of defective cement . Britain 's Building Research establishment was consulted by Spanish authorities about this problem . Shaun Pilgrem , an architect with British and Spanish qualifications practising in Barcelona , says the stories are true , but the problem is localised and the authorities are dealing with it . Others in the property world are less sure . Clearly professional vetting of a property there would be wise . What of Spain 's little known regions ? South of Seville there is the coast on either side of Cadiz , the Costa de la Luz . Home seekers might look at the estate of Atlanterra 90 minutes from Gibraltar overlooking the largely deserted silver Atlantic beaches . Civilisation in this southernmost tip of Europe is represented by the village of Sahara de los Atunes , which boasts a four star hotel . Adjoining it is the office of Ignacio Silva , who speaks English and handles sales for the Atlanterra estate ( tel 43-91-51 ) . Normally , he says , the minimum total price for a plot and a house built to your requirements is Pounds 240,000 . But there is one house available , right on the beach . The living room opens on to the garden , swimming pool and sands . There are two bedrooms and bathrooms in the house and two in a separate guest section . The property is Pounds 682,500 . The holiday home hunter in a different price bracket might usefully explore the rural villages inland from the Mediterranean coast . Many , like similar areas in France and Italy , are becoming ruins as the young people leave for the towns . In his Overseas Homebuyer 's Handbook , property expert Geoffrey Pilgrem explains that few agents bother to offer such property partly because prices are so low that it is not worth their trouble . In some areas whole villages have been abandoned . Pilgrem suggests the valley and lake region south west of Andorra . He warns that there might be difficulties acquiring such a rural home and 'one needs one 's hand firmly held . ' Some people might see the abandoned villages as 'spooky . ' He sees the area as 'quite magical . ' One British agency that specialises in this corner of Spain is Bradley Vaughan , in Haywards Heath , Sussex . ( tel 0444-412551 ) . It offers properties for renovation from Pounds 8,000 . But Pounds 15,000 might be more realistic . Overseas Homebuyer 's Handbook , David & Charles , Pounds 13.99 , 256 pages .