Dubai wants to be everywhere else in the world at once . It would like its ports to be the Singapore of the Middle East and its air-cargo terminal the Seattle of the Middle East ; it wants to become a Miami-style cruise centre for the Middle East and it wants its golf courses to make the emirate the Wentworth of the Middle East . There are plans to make it the Epsom of the Middle East with a new horse-racing track . And those are just a few of its ambitions - leaving aside for a moment plans to build its own GulfoDisney-type theme park . About the only places in the world Dubai apparently does not want to resemble are Riyadh , for example , or Abu Dhabi , its big-brother emirate down the coast . When Dubai 's promoters , who are ubiquitous , talk of this magpie city-state being 'cosmopolitan ' , what they mean is that Dubai is not a particularly typical Gulf , or even Arab city . Even its indigenous locals apparently feel much the same way . ' I love it when people say Dubai is like San Diego , ' says Mr Mohammed al-Abbar , the new head of the city 's Economics Department , in his impeccable US accent . He is just back from six years in Singapore . One obvious reason why Dubai does not have a specially Arab feel is because local Arabs make up a only small proportion of the city 's estimated 600,000 inhabitants - perhaps only a fifth . Indians , Iranians , Pakistanis , Filipinos , Sri Lankans and a large helping of Americans , Britons and other Europeans make up the rest . And it was ever thus . Wilfred Thesiger , the British explorer , arrived in Dubai circa 1948 to find the soukhs crowded with 'pallid Arab townsmen ; armed Bedu , quick-eyed and imperious ; Negro slaves ; Baluchis , Persians , and Indians . Among them I noticed a group of Kashgai tribesmen in their distinctive felt caps , and some Somalis off a sambuk from Aden . ' Dubai 's promiscuous port has attracted buyers and sellers from everywhere since it was settled by the Maktoum family , who seceded from Abu Dhabi in 1833 . The Maktoums have traditionally barred few from entering Dubai who might add to its wealth . Today , as a result , quick-eyed armed Bedu are thin on the ground . There are a couple slung with worn wooden carbines guarding the British Bank of the Middle East , one of Dubai 's founding colonial institutions , but these days they are allowed only one , symbolic , bullet between them . Thesiger would also recognise little of the town itself - in his heyday a sparsely-settled Gulfside village with a fort , now the city 's museum , and few big buildings among the settlers ' palm-frond houses . Although Dubai 's first concrete house was not built until 1956 , the advent of oil and the development ambitions of Sheikh Rashid bin Saeed bin Maktoum , the emirate 's second ruler who died in 1990 , quickly turned Dubai into a sprawling , low-rise city which today is crossed by multi-lane highways roaring with traffic and which is studded with prestige modern hotels and occasional high-rises . You can spot the desert from some of these , but you would need a car to find a camel . Its plethora of soukhs , shopping streets and cavernous marbled malls burst with cloth , clothes , watches enough for the wrists of a small continent , cameras , TVs , walkmans and almost anything else , at knock-down prices which brave and persistent souls can try knocking down further . If there is a shopping equivalent of Stendhal 's Syndrome - a condition identified in Florence of dizziness brought on by excessive exposure to great works of art - its first victims will fall palpitating in Dubai . Just as dizzying is Dubai 's kaleidoscope of cultures . By wanting to be everywhere at once , the city ends up not really knowing what it is . The streets of Satwa , with their curry houses , tiny tailor shops and mirror-tiled barbers , might be the suburb of an Indian city . The Chicago Beach village , just out of town , could be a corner of Marbella ; its satellite shopping malls perhaps Calgary or Edmonton . It may reflect Dubai's cultural indecision that the city has roundabouts with traffic lights . Its interiors can be equally bemusing . Sit in one of the hotels ' de rigueur English-style pubs and you will likely be served by a Filipino in full oriental dress against a backdrop wallposter view of the Eiffel Tower - probably while enjoying 'Caribbean night ' music . The new and elite Aviation Club is resplendent with roman pillars , pagodas and English lawns , all done with an austere Swedish finish . As a rule of thumb , what is not Arabesque in Dubai is pastiche and everything , preferably , is brand new . But Dubai specialises in its incongruities . No sight in the Gulf is more arresting , for example , than the Emirates Golf Club , an undulating 18-hole oasis in the greened sands east of the city , which earlier this year Seve Ballesteiros conquered to win the first round of the PGA circuit . The Creek golf club , nearing completion in the city 's south , with its sharpened Sydney Opera House clubhouse and a yacht marina to follow , is a similarly defiant sight . These golf clubs , and Dubai 's beach resorts , innumerable sports clubs and other grand facilities are not folies de richesse - even at a cost of Dhs8 per gallon of water to green the fairways . Rather , they are part of a concerted and extremely high-energy campaign to champion Dubai as the Gulf's most attractive centre for foreign investment . And without more foreign investment , the emirate 's opulence will not survive the drying of its oil wells - at present rates due some time early next century . Behind this lies the determination of Dubai 's government - that is Sheikh Maktoum bin Rashid , the ruler , and his brothers - to do all in its power to make the city-state an atypically easy place to do business by Gulf standards . Flowing from this desire are the development of the Jebel Ali free trade zone outside the city , where foreign companies can enjoy 100 per cent ownership ; the creation and aggressive marketing of Emirates airlines ; the sponsorship of world-class sporting events and the selling of Dubai as a tourist resort ; the golf courses , and a generally hands-off approach to government . About the only thing preventing the government from turning Dubai into a full-blown Hong Kong is the emirate 's place within the seven-city state United Arab Emirates ( UAE ) , which is dominated by the far more conservatively Gulf Arab , and far more oil wealthy , Abu Dhabi . 'They 're more capitalist here than Thatcher , ' is how one expatriate businessman puts it . 'The only reason they do n't deregulate things more is because of the UAE and the Gulf Co-operation Council ( which groups the six main Arabian Peninsular states ) : they do n't want to upset people . ' Instead , and in keeping with an abiding rivalry with its bigger neighbour , Dubai seeks to distinguish itself by the audacity of its ambition . After the golf courses will come a horse-racing track which will host an international meet . Dubai will host a round of the world 's power boat championships ; then build a theme park . Then , perhaps , run its own cruise liners ; maybe build a new cricket pitch which some people are already suggesting might vie for the cricket world cup . Perhaps it will even install a monorail linking all Dubai 's hotels to the theme park . One rumour even has it that Dubai is considering creating a ski-slope on the mountains to its west , with real snow . Presumably the idea is to turn Dubai into the Gstaad of the Middle East .