UNACCUSTOMED nervous-ness has struck New Zealand bond markets following the surprise failure of last week 's NZDollars 350m ( USDollars 194.4m ) tender in government bonds . State tenders have customarily been oversubscribed three or more times , and the failure , the first since 1986 , has sharply focused attention on the dwindling support for these issues from overseas . Figures released on Friday , two days after the announcement that only Dollars NZ233m of the tender had been taken up , show that overseas investors practically halved their exposure to New Zealand government debt last year . At December 31 , foreign holdings were 10.1 per cent of the total stock on issue , down from a peak of 19.7 per cent in March , or NZDollars 2.08bn , against Dollars NZ1.24bn . The New Zealand bond markets have always relied on offshore support . What some observers sense as growing disenchantment is worrying policymakers as the government is still only part way through its Dollars NZ6.2bn borrowing programme for the financial year to June 1992 . A further Dollars NZ2.6bn of bonds is still to be sold , in seven tenders . Originally only four were planned , but an extra three , of NZDollars 350m each , were scheduled following the Treasury 's revised December fiscal forecasts of a NZDollars 1bn budget shortfall . Falling overseas interest in New Zealand bonds follows a steady drop in yields . In 1991 , five-year bond yields fell from 13 per cent to 8.5 per cent . This is in line with rapidly falling inflation which is now down to just 1 per cent . The New Zealand dollar has fallen in value by 11 per cent . There is pressure on the government and the Reserve Bank , which handles monetary policy , to let rates fall further : real interest rates in New Zealand are among the highest in the world . However the failure of last week 's bond tender suggests this is most unlikely . Rates , especially longer term , are expected to rise . The Treasury is expected to try to reawaken overseas interest in New Zealand bonds . However many US and other investors tend to lump Australia and New Zealand together for investment purposes . New Zealand is seen to be suffering from international uncertainties over the Australian economy . In spite of some recent firming , New Zealand bond yields are significantly lower than Australia 's . Five-year Australian rates are about 9 per cent , compared with 8.8 per cent in New Zealand and 10-year Australian bonds are 10.10 against 9.45 per cent here . The average interest rate for five-year bonds in the failed tender was 8.86 per cent , compared with 8.51 in the January 23 tender . An average 9.37 per cent was paid for 10-year bonds ( against 9.06 per cent ) . Some traders argue the tender failure was a one-off aberration . The tender was made one day before the Waitangi Day public holiday . Traders also argue that the maturity schedule needs readjusting . Last week 's underbidding was in the usually sought-after November 1996 bonds , while the November 2002 were all sold locally . The failure followed a string of more favourable economic news , but there have been rumours that New Zealand could face a credit downgrade from Standard and Poor 's because of its stubbornly high level of overseas debt .