Christmas is coming and the price of prawns is going up , illustrating both the changing nature of the Australian Christmas and the danger of over-exploiting fragile fishing grounds . Apart from the weather , an English visitor of 30 or even 20 years ago would have been hard pressed to spot the difference between Christmas in Sydney and Christmas in Sydenham , south London . Inspired by the view held by Sir Robert Menzies , Australia 's prime minister from 1946 to 1965 , who portrayed his country as the modern-day jewel in the British crown , Australians were still doing everything they could to evade the realities of the un-English climate and geography . Ignoring summer temperatures of 30 degrees centigrade or more , families ate heavy meals of hot turkey , roast beef and plum pudding , and then watched or listened to the Queen 's traditional Christmas day broadcast from London . Presents were piled around imported Christmas trees , holly wreaths were nailed to front doors , and the most enthusiastic attempted to simulate the effect of snow on window panes . Even in the 1960s , there must have been plenty of Australians of non-British heritage who thought this collective attachment to the 'traditional' Christmas a bit strange in a country where December falls in midsummer . But few of that generation of immigrants felt able to resist the pressure from the Anglo-Saxon majority to conform by becoming more Australian , which meant , of course , more British . Now attitudes are changing , and the style of Christmas celebrations is becoming less homogeneous , reflecting the move towards a more genuinely Australian culture which started a decade or so ago . For one thing , Australian government policy is now officially multicultural , which has helped give minority ethnic groups the self-confidence to develop or reinterpret their own Christmas traditions . For another , the sheer number of immigrants who have come to Australia since the second world war ( more than doubling the population from 8m to 17m ) have altered the ethnic balance of the population and weakened ties with the so-called mother country . Fewer than 60 per cent of Australians now claim family ties with Britain and Ireland , compared with more than 90 per cent 40 years ago . The New Australians are Italian , Greek , Yugoslav , Arab and , increasingly , Asian . Few of the new Australians will spend Christmas day in the house or garden , where the Menzies-era Australians felt most comfortable . They will be at the beach , or at the many parks and recreation areas maintained by local councils , which often include family-style barbecues . Others will work out their own compromise between tradition and common sense . A Swiss friend plans to cook her family 's traditional Swiss ham outside in a barbecue . English friends will cook a turkey the day before , and eat it cold with salad . But it is not just recent immigrants who are finding new ways to celebrate Christmas . Many Australians of British extraction whose families have lived in their new homeland for generations are also taking a fresh look at the merits of tradition . After all , Britain has been consciously cutting its ties with the old dominions since it joined the European Community in 1973 , encouraging Australians to come to terms with their own region . From this perspective , Paul Keating , the Labor prime minister , was only reflecting the drift of opinion when he suggested earlier this year that Australia should become a republic and remove the Union symbol from the corner of the national flag . These ideas are still at the formative stage , and it may be years before either comes to fruition . But once people start thinking about such weighty ideas as national destiny , just about every facet of life is likely to come under the microscope . So it is hardly surprising that there are less frost-inspired decorations around this year , or that snowy windowpanes have almost entirely disappeared , or that fewer Christmas cards feature horse-drawn sleighs jingling down snowy village lanes . Even the schools are getting in on the act . Children are still making models of Santa 's sleigh , but the motive power is more likely to be supplied by kangaroos than reindeer . And koalas and wallabies are appearing in the Christmas stable . There are still some oddities about Christmas Down Under . At my local carol service in north Sydney , for example , shirt-sleeved children sang uncomprehendingly about events In The Deep Mid-Winter , and appeared entirely unimpressed by the Boxing day trials of poor , frozen , Good King Wenceslas . Increasingly , however , Australians are ready to put their own stamp on Christmas , even if no two people agree about what it should be . In time , a uniquely Australian Christmas may emerge , reflecting the development of a more mature and self-confident society . But for now , it 's everyone for himself . Me ? I shall be throwing another prawn on the barbie , and dreaming of a white Christmas .