EMPEROR Akihito and Empress Michiko of Japan are to pay an official visit to China in October to mark the 20th anniversary of the restoration of diplomatic relations between China and Japan . The visit , approved by the Japanese cabinet yesterday morning after months of national debate , promises to be rich in historical as well as contemporary political significance . Relations between China and Japan go back 2,000 years , but this will be the first visit by a Japanese head of state to China . Approval of the visit comes after repeated invitations from the Chinese , and marks something of a diplomatic coup for them , as it will further ease the isolation imposed on them after the suppression of democracy protests in Tiananmen Square in 1989 . The visit is fiercely opposed by right-wing nationalists in Japan , who fear China will use the visit for its own political purposes and may try to get the Emperor to apologise for Japan 's behaviour during the war or press for war reparations . A Foreign Ministry official , however , said : 'The Emperor is not going to China to apologise . ' The visit is to promote friendship and goodwill . Nonetheless , anti-Japanese sentiment among Chinese stemming from the brutality of Japanese troops during the war remains strong , and the imperial family is still linked symbolically to the events of that period . The Emperor will not find it easy to summon words expressing sincere regret that will please both his Chinese hosts and critics at home , many of whom believe Japan was not responsible for the war . The Foreign Ministry official said the government was responsible for the Emperor 's remarks during the visit . He admitted , however , that the issue was highly political and would be subject to careful consultation between the prime minister 's office and the palace . Approval of the visit reflects a fundamental Japanese policy of trying to engage the Chinese in regional diplomacy rather than trying to isolate the country . 'Good relations between China and Japan should contribute to peace and stability in Asia and the world , ' the official said . 'It is wrong to drive China toward the road to isolation . '