It used to be said that French carmakers would be knocked spinning by Japanese competition once Europe lifted its curbs on car imports at the end of the decade . Now is the time to send that view to the crusher . Over the past decade , Peugeot and Renault , the country 's two main car groups , have retreated from the brink of bankruptcy and top executives at both believe they can catch up and fight on equal terms with Japan . Last year , the Peugeot group , which also includes Citroen , was the world's most profitable carmaker in terms of net sales margins . Renault staged a startling recovery , with more than doubled net profits , and outsold all foreign competition in the fast growing German market . Can these be the same companies that were one of Europe 's biggest industrial headaches 10 years ago ? Not quite . Since then , they have made big increases in quality , productivity and efficiency . European volume producers took more than twice as long per man as their Japanese counterparts to make a car in 1989 , according to a seminal study by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) * . Today , French carmakers' productivity is a mere 10 per cent behind that of Japanese car producers in Britain , itself 10 per cent behind the Japanese in Japan , says another study by consultants McKinsey . Just how Peugeot and Renault came so far is instructive to other European manufacturing industries aiming to match Japanese productivity standards . Like carmakers across the world , the French have made deep cuts in their workforces , down by 25 per cent over the past five years at Renault and 5 per cent at the leaner Peugeot . They still have a long way to go , according to a recent study by the French planning commission , which estimates that the French car industry must trim its labour force by another 2.5 per cent a year for the rest of the decade to be competitive . Job cuts are only part of the story . Peugeot and Renault have have also made profound changes in the way people and stocks are organised , overturning old hierarchies and introducing Japanese-style project and production management teams . Peugeot reckons to have improved the number of cars made per man by 50 per cent in five years , while Renault says it has improved its productivity by 6 per cent per year over the same period . Both aim to repeat that improvement by the end of the decade . This is partly the result of heavy investment in automated production lines in the mid-1980s . The investment has not been an unqualified success , however . Recently , they have re-introduced more labour and simpler machines to the shopfloor , because the new robots broke down too often . This is revealing , for as the MIT study pointed out , organisation is more important than automation in even the most modern Japanese plants . Again , Renault and Peugeot applied a lesson from Japan by breaking down the old production line into small , autonomous units , each responsible for product quality and machine maintenance . This has already enabled Peugeot to close the refinishing departments which used to occupy 10 to 20 per cent of total production time . 'Now each team does its own refinishing on the production line and is taught to treat the next team down the line as a customer , ' says Jean-Yves Helmer , director of the Peugeot group 's car division . French carmakers see themselves today , like their Japanese competitors , as primarily designers and assemblers . They have mostly stopped being highly integrated , although they still make what they consider to be strategic components like automatic gearboxes , where Peugeot and Renault are considering collaborating . Bought-in components have risen to just over 60 per cent of costs at Peugeot and 67 per cent at Renault , a steep rise over recent years . Renault has set up a 'make or buy committee ' , which treats in-house suppliers on the same footing as external components makers , says Philippe Gras , deputy chief executive . Like the Japanese , the French have started to work more closely with component suppliers , to the extent of consulting on new designs . Peugeot and Renault have for the past five years been running joint audits to keep component suppliers ' quality up to the mark , grading them - Japanese style again - according to their ability to do their own quality control . They are thinking of extending this system to cover suppliers ' productivity too . Suppliers are also expected to deliver more frequently to match the just-in-time stock control which is now commonplace in both groups' factories . Peugeot , for example , has reduced its stocks of unfinished goods from 12 days ' supply in 1984 to four days last year . But this technique is also a risk for French carmakers , because they can not guarantee Japanese-style labour stability . Renault discovered this to its cost last year when a strike at its engine and gearbox plant took 10 days to bring its entire French and Belgian car production to a halt . Design management is another important element in productivity where the French are quickly applying lessons from the Far East . Japan still designs and launches new cars much faster and more cheaply than France , for around FFr3-4bn ( Pounds 300m-Pounds 400m ) in three years , as against the French average of FFr6-8bn in four to five years . Renault and Peugeot have taken similar approaches to the problem . Formerly , new cars were designed in a cumbersome way , with the blueprint passing from the design department through engineering and production management . Both companies have in the past three years started setting up project teams , which bring together all departments involved in a new car launch to work simultaneously . design teams of its two sister companies under a single management to help them work faster and expects to produce the first concrete results for new models from 1994 . Both agree that despite the progress , one big problem remains . French carworkers are older and less educated than their Japanese counterparts . 'Gigantic efforts , ' are needed to correct this handicap , says the planning commission report , which calls for heavy public spending on retraining . 'We have from now until the year 2000 to get up to the right level . All of us in the company know we can do it , ' says Gras . * The Machine that Changed the World , by James Womack , Daniel Jones and Daniel Roos ; Macmillan .