GOLD HAD given up its role as a long term store of value and was now a commodity , suggested Mr David Pryde , managing director of JP Morgan , at the Financial Times World Gold Conference in Montreux yesterday . This would continue to shape general perceptions about the precious metal , its price potential and associated trading ranges and volatility . He said oil and other energy-related products were now being used by investors wanting to hedge against inflation or to counter negative market developments . Whereas 10 years ago gold would have represented 80 to 100 per cent of a counterhedge against inflation , today it accounted for only 5 to 30 per cent . However , the sums of money under management today were greater than ever before , so the quantities of gold required were still substantial . 'Even as a commodity gold remains a large and diverse market with many significantly differentiated participants and this diversity of interest and need will continue to create opportunity as long as we recognise and accept changing realities , ' he said . Reasons for gold 's relative loss of appeal in the Middle East were supplied by Mr Marwan Shakarchi , president of MKS Finance . He said that some investors discovered during the Gulf war gold holdings proved useless for protecting wealth . One Saudi jeweller told him that it took weeks to get out his gold but only one day to take all his precious stones with him . After the war Saudi people dishorded most of their gold and bought instead US dollar notes or travellers ' cheques . Mr Barclay Leib , a vice president of J. Aron-Goldman Sachs , said gold as an 'asset class ' was 'clearly in disrepute ' . The price performance had been poor in the past 10 years mainly because investors had given it up in favour of the high interest rates offered by federal governments and financial institutions that 'in essence are guaranteed by these governments against default ' . Mr Ralf Kreikenbaum , a director of Commerzbank International SA Luxembourg , said that in Europe a new generation of investors had never learned to look on gold as a crisis and inflation-proof store of value and means of payment . 'Those inheriting fortunes built up according to conservative principles are looking for higher yields for their portfolios . They are also more prepared to run risks , ' he pointed out . When heirs to a family inheritance opened up the safe deposit box and saw the pile of gold 'their first reaction is to ask : What shall we invest in once we have got rid of the gold ? ' Mr Richard Scott-Ram , chief economist and strategist for the World Gold Council , said that small investors in the US were bearish about gold 's price prospects so demand for gold coins and investment in gold-oriented mutual funds was low . Investment by US institutions in gold bullion was probably non-existent last year . However , some US institutions had sizeable investments in gold company shares and 'financial claims ' on gold ( such as purchases of call options on gold ) had picked up considerably in recent weeks . This pick up in demand for derivatives should feed back into increased demand for physical gold . In Japan investors and speculators disappointed by the gold price performance were 'fading from the market , ' said Mr Kentaro Ojima , general manager of Sumitomo Corporation 's precious metals dealing department . However , a new type of relatively young investor was emerging in Japan who was not as rich as the traditional investor but was supporting the growth of gold accumulation plans . These involve a regular monthly payment going to buy gold at the present market price . About 300,000 people bought 30 tonnes of gold - about half of Japan 's total investment demand for the metal - last year . Mr Ojima suggested that in five years this might grow to 1m people buying an annual 100 tonnes . Most of the speakers pointed out that China held the key to future gold demand . Mr Robert Sitt , managing director of Mase Westpac Hong Kong , said that the Chinese government projected GNP growth of 8 per cent annually and on a compound basis , gold consumption in China could double to reach 800 tonnes by the year 2000 . 'This would be a conservative estimate if we take into account the high growth rate of consumption of 448 per cent recorded in Taiwan in the last decade , ' he pointed out . Although gold bar hoarding was weaker in the South-east Asian markets outside Japan ( sophisticated investors were put off by the negative return on the precious metal , he said ) gold jewellery demand remained strong . The region , which took about 120 tonnes of gold in 1986 , could therefore this year absorb more than 800 tonnes - a record . 'With the potential growth of offtake , particularly in China , the entire western world mine production could easily be absorbed , ' Mr Sitt pointed out . Mr Tim Green , chief consultant at Gold Fields Minerals Services , said that future gold jewellery demand 'depends considerably on new mega-markets like China ' . At present the Malaysian jewellery industry simply could not cope with demands for chuk kam jewellery for China . Demand for gold jewellery elsewhere in the world remained patchy , said Mr Green , but Chinese purchases had helped to push the total last year to a record 2,250 tonnes . Pointing out that this was more than all the newly mined gold last year , Mr Green added : 'Jewellery is not just the cornerstone of the gold market it is now virtually the whole building ' . Fortunately for the gold producers jewellery demand was spread over a wide number of markets , unlike , for example , diamonds which relied on two or three key markets . 'To coin a phrase , diamonds are forever but carat gold jewellery is for everywhere , ' said Mr Green . There was a confusing message from the conference about the prospects for the gold price . Mr Shakarchi suggested that Middle Eastern investors were holding back from buying gold because 'they do not view present levels as the bottom and are standing aside awaiting lower prices ' . He added : ' I believe that in the short term the gold price will stay stable to a bit lower and for the medium term , barring any other major incident , we shall gradually move even lower ' . Ms Rhona O'Connell , analyst at Williams de Broe , said , however , that the market should overcome its fear that higher prices would generate more sales by gold producers and test Dollars 350 a troy ounce and possibly Dollars 365 over the next few months . She pointed out that gold retained its attraction as ' a wholly anonymous form of legal tender and there is a high proportion of the world's population that prefers to hold gold rather than paper money ' . This philosophy formed part of the rationale behind central bank holdings 'and is one of the reasons which puts some doubt behind the likelihood of a wholesale disposal of gold holdings from the official sector - any crisis of confidence in a country 's currency means that gold reserves are vital as a perceived , if not actual , asset of last resort ' .