TRANSPORT ministers from the 28 countries in the European Civil Aviation Conference ( ECAC ) will meet in London tomorrow to step up efforts to improve Europe 's fragmented and inadequate air traffic control structure . Airlines and civil aviation authorities have warned that Europe faces an air travel crisis in the next few years unless urgent action is taken to harmonise and integrate European air traffic control systems . Air traffic delays are estimated to cost European airlines Dollars 4bn ( Pounds 2.2bn ) -Dollars 5bn a year , and airlines say the current air traffic control system risks undermining Brussels ' efforts to liberalise European air transport . The problem is highlighted in a report the transport ministers will consider . The report says the work needed to harmonise and improve air traffic control 'will be much greater ' than first estimated . The biggest deficiency of the present network is that the different European air traffic control centres use computers from 18 different makers with 22 different operating systems and 33 different programming languages . Two years ago , the transport ministers launched a long-term initiative to enhance European air traffic control in response to the air travel crisis of summer 1988 , when Europe 's system could not cope with heavy holiday demand , with thousands of passengers stranded at airports . The problem was acute in the UK where delays have been exacerbated by air traffic congestion in continental Europe , as well as regular strikes by continental air traffic controllers . ECAC ministers will attempt to draw up concrete proposals to integrate the different European air traffic control systems . They are also expected to consider introducing new air routes and airspace structures , and new facilities with common procedures . Although last year 's air travel slump caused by the recession and the Gulf conflict eased some of the immediate pressures facing European air traffic control , the recovery in traffic this year is expected to revive the problem . Figures for airline punctuality , released by the Association of European Airlines ( AEA ) , which groups 22 European carriers , showed little improvement in delays last year despite the traffic slowdown . The AEA said 19 per cent of airline departures in Europe were delayed more than 15 minutes last year , only slightly better than the previous year . The AEA also said congestion continued to grow in Europe last year with 54,000 aircraft hours lost because of congestion . This was the equivalent to the annual workload of a fleet of 20 short-haul jets . Mr Giovanni Bisignani , the current AEA chairman and managing director of Alitalia , recently warned that Europe 's inadequate air traffic control system could lead to another summer of delays and cancellations this year .