The best bit of living history in Dubai is its creek , where neither the shape of the wooden dhows , nor their profitable trade , have changed much since 800 settlers , led by the the Maktoum family , deserted Abu Dhabi to set up shop on its shores more than 160 years ago . Only the contents of the galleon-hulled boats , and the replacement of sails by diesel engines , mark the tides of time . Stacked boxes of Sony TVs , Zanussi fridges or plastic-wrapped Japanese car tyres along the quay are recent additions to hand-written cargo manifests which still include the bags of rice and spices which have always found their way from Dubai 's port to Iran , Pakistan , India and beyond . While locals are keen to point out that little arrives illicitly in Dubai - customs officials say illegal drug imports are minor and hotly pursued by the police - it is still a thriving source of smuggling into Iran , India and Pakistan . 'We pay no taxes to work here , ' says one Indian shipper . 'But we use the money we save to pay the Iranian police . ' The creek was also once among the world 's biggest gold trading centres , mostly supplying gold to India . At its peak in the late 1960s , Dubai was importing 280 tons of gold for re-export , a figure down to just over 100 tons these days . Dubai 's creek curls further inland than any other in the emirates , and has traditionally been the coast 's busiest and most cosmopolitan . The earliest settlers lived on the western spit of Shindaghah , now essentially part of Port Rashid , Dubai 's man-made port , but by the late nineteenth century , a large Indian community had settled on the western Dubai side of the creek , with Arabs and Persians principally on the eastern Deira shore . By the late 1800s Dubai was already the busiest trading port among the Trucial States , named after their treaty agreement with colonial Britain , and among the busiest pearling centres , a trade worth around Pounds 1.5m a year to the region at the turn of the century , before the advent of the Japanese cultured pearl killed the industry in the late 1920s . But trade , notably dhow trade smuggling sugar , tea , cloth and gold into Persian and Indian ports , flourished . By 1951 , Gray & Mackenzie , the British shippers , built Dubai 's first port crane , which still stands near the ruler 's office , where all cargo was unloaded . The first road bridge over the creek , the Maktoum Bridge which is soon to be replaced with a newer eight-lane cousin , was opened in only 1963 , before which passengers between Dubai and Deira had either to drive around the creek to the north , or cross on the small wooden abra vessels ( water taxis ) which still dissect the dhows ' paths today . By the mid 1960s Dubai 's creek was full to bursting with dhows and steamers , and the arrival of pioneering oil construction companies such as McDermott to Dubai , so clogged the emirate 's main artery that Sheikh Rashid , the father of the present ruler , Sheikh Maktoum bin Rashid al Maktoum , decreed the building of Port Rashid , adjacent to the creek and still Dubai 's busiest port . With the later addition of Jebel Ali port in 1979 , the creek 's contribution to Dubai 's trade has diminished considerably to around half a per cent of the total tonnage landed yearly in Dubai . But it thrives about its own business as ever , with dhows lining the length of the eastern shore moored three , four , or even seven or eight abreast - congestion which a new marina to be built over the next year or so is designed to clear . The quay is busiest at dusk , as steel-shouldered crew load the wooden dhows , bhoums and launches - which , old as they appear , have for the most part been built recently - with bundles , boxes and , in some cases , and with the minimum of mechanical assistance , small cars , ready for the two-day journey to Kish Island or Bandar Abbas in Iran , or on to Karachi in Pakistan . Most of the boats are chartered by local shippers . One , typically , was loaded with 700 Sony TVs bound for Kish Island in Iran , a trip for which a local electronics distributor had paid Dh7,000 , having unloaded the Sonys from Port Rashid for re-export . Most of the Iranian , Indian , Pakistani or Sri Lankan crewmen live very simply on board their boats , beneath the flat sunshade canopies at the rear , housing a few basic mattresses and perhaps a small barbecue or the occasional hubble-bubble pipe . Today , the creek where Wilfred Thesiger , the great British Arabist explorer of the 1940s , watched as 'naked children romped in the shallows , and rowing boats patrolled the creek to pick up passengers from the mouths of alleys , between high coral houses , surmounted with square wind-turrets ' is lined on the east by a motley collection of bold and modernistic high-rises and retains its romance only at quay side . Gone too is the British Bank of the Middle East 's 'very special lavatory' remembered by Edward Henderson , the Iraq Petroleum Company 's representative in Dubai in the late 1940s . This , he recalls , 'was really no more than a platform sticking out over the water , with the essential slit in its middle , tastefully boxed in and screened from view with palm branches ' . But changed as it is , the creek is in for a further facelift . A grassy 18-hole golf course on the north-eastern side of the creek , Dubai 's second , is already almost complete , and a further illuminated nine hole course and yacht club will follow . On the west bank , earth is already being moved to create what will become Dubai 's biggest and greenest park while at the end of the creek , near where a shallow lagoon has become a temporary home to hundreds of flamingos , the occasional osprey , reef herons and countless plovers and shanks , is planned a theme park . 'The old creek is coming under a lot of developmental pressure , ' remarks Mr Lawrence Mills of the Dubai Commerce and Tourism Promotions Board . Thesiger , contemplating the creek more than 50 years ago , reflected that 'here life moved in time with the past ' , adding , regretful of his distinguishing European garb , that ' I myself felt that I was little better than a tourist ' . How times have changed .