A CIRCLE ROUND THE SUN : A FOREIGNER IN JAPAN by Peregrine Hodson Heinemann Pounds 16.99 , 307 pages THE OUTNATION : A SEARCH FOR THE SOUL OF JAPAN by Jonathan Rauch Harvard Business School Press Dollars 18.95 , 200 pages JAPANESE goods have conquered the world . Japanese companies have bought parts of the Great American Dream . Japan 's leaders take their places at the top table at international gatherings . Its citizens have become familiar figures in the most fashionable locations in the most cosmopolitan cities of the world . Japan nevertheless conjures up conflicting images , because of its mix of modern occidental practices with the mysticism of the orient . Sometimes it is presented as an alien country whose inhabitants might have come from outer space . Such a view is fostered by Yamato nationalists who claim that Japan is unique , certainly like nowhere else on earth . Eminent Japanese have written articles claiming that Japanese brains , Japanese intestines and even Japanese snow are different from any other brains , intestines or snow . These two authors went to Japan to explore its mysteries . Peregrine Hodson is British , a barrister , had lived in Japan before , speaks Japanese and wrote his account after spending three years in Tokyo working for a foreign bank . Jonathan Rauch is an American on his first visit , who does not speak Japanese and who spent six months in the country . Both books are highly personalised and episodic . Hodson 's most frequently used word is ' I ' . Possibly Hodson 's object is to get into the Guinness Book of Records for the number of uses of the personal pronoun . It is slightly more interesting counting the ' I 's than reading what goes in between . There is some interesting material and he has a few vivid descriptions , but if he spent as much time as he admits breathing into his tape recorder during office hours it is a surprise that he survived so long . In contrast , Rauch 's observations raise very pertinent issues without an intrusive ' I ' . The book is riveting . Precisely because he does not set himself up as an expert , but goes to see and learn before drawing his conclusions , Rauch has written an enjoyable , profound book , perhaps a minor classic . He finds a Japan that reminds him of Plato 's utopia based on Sparta . He finds much that reminds him of the US years ago . He demolishes the claim that the Japanese alone have a distinction between 'tatemae ' , the feelings they show to the world , and 'honne ' , what they really feel . Similar distinctions , he correctly observes , can be found in most cultures . He dismisses the myth of Japanese uniqueness : 'The Japanese are precisely as mysterious and unique as my aunt in Hackensack , ' he concludes .