OFFSHORE oil workers met representatives from Shell late yesterday to discuss the helicopter crash on Saturday night which killed 11 people , amid calls for tougher safety regulations on North Sea helicopters . Mr Ronnie MacDonald , who chairs the Offshore Industry Liaison Committee , a union representing oil workers , said : 'Some very serious questions have to be asked about search and rescue cover offshore . ' Mr MacDonald said there is currently no UK regulation requiring North Sea operators to have rescue facilities on-site , leaving them free to rely on shore-based safety cover . Shell had shut down its own helicopter in the harsh weather conditions on Saturday night . The helicopter that crashed was a freight and passenger machine which was on a visit to the platform and was asked to transfer the crew . Search teams yesterday recovered the bodies of the remaining five oil workers and the wreckage of the heli-copter . Mr MacDonald said the survivors from the crash were rescued by a Norwegian helicopter in an operation which took about 40 minutes . 'But if a helicopter has to come from onshore , it can take over an hour to reach the site of the accident . ' Some North Sea operators have removed rescue facilities from their field-based helicopters because of the cost of carrying them . A year ago offshore workers protested strongly when British Petroleum moved its rescue helicopter from the Forties field . The facility had been in place for 12 years and had rescued nine people . Shell said yesterday there will be an extensive inquiry into the cause of the acci-dent . Mr Chris Ryan at the UK Offshore Operators Association , which represents companies operating in the North Sea , said : 'The industry is not averse to spending money on helicopter safety . ' Mr Ryan said oil companies are investing Pounds 25m in a scheme to improve helicopter maintenance . The association 's aircraft committee will meet next week to discuss the implications of Saturday 's accident .