IF you are over 45 and have at least four drinks a day after work , you should be concerned . Yet most managers are reluctant to face the problem of alcohol abuse , despite the quantity and quality of research on the subject . My own findings suggest that managers have a folkloric understanding of alcohol 's effects . When asked about their weekly consumption of alcohol , more than 80 per cent ignored wine and beer , counting only spirits as 'alcohol ' . Adding to the misunderstanding are the old wives ' tales about alcohol . More than 60 per cent of interviewed managers believe that alcohol is 'good for the heart ' or 'helps in digestion ' . Alcohol is the principal means by which the highly stressed manager can anaesthetize himself . Moreover , many executives still see alcohol as a 'lubricant ' for contacts and deals , and do plenty of business around alcohol . Alcohol can be a source of enjoyment but is it part of your problem or your solution ? The chances are that alcohol is a 'problem ' if you are drinking more than 28 units per week ( a 'unit ' is a glass of wine , bottle of beer , or a shot of spirits ) . Researchers from Barcelona recently published in the New England Journal of Medicine results of studies which demonstrated that the muscle fibres of the heart are weakened by heavy drinking . The Framingham Study of nearly 5,000 people confirmed that , instead of being 'cardio-protective ' , heavy alcohol use can be toxic to the heart and skeletal muscle , causing dangerous enlargement of the pumping chambers of the heart . When used injudiciously , alcohol impairs a full range of functions both cerebral ( memory , concentration , judgement and learning ) and physical ( sexual , co-ordination , balance and speech ) . It has been estimated that more than 60 per cent of liver cirrhosis ( irreparable scarring of the liver ) is caused by alcohol , and you need not be a 'problem drinker ' to develop alcoholic 's liver disease . Alcohol is also a rich source of non-nutritive calories and , therefore , heavy drinking is associated with weight gain and vitamin deficiency . Moreover , alcohol can cause marked water and mineral losses , leaving you tired and weak . Some managers already recognise all this and no longer view drinking as a rite of passage for advancement in international business life . For the rest : The first step is to know where you stand . Start by counting the number of drinks you have in a typical week , both at work and at home . Maintaining a ceiling of 3 drinks per day is , by most estimates , probably safe . Binge drinking is to be avoided . To gauge your relationship to alcohol , abstain from drinking for two or three weeks and see how you react . Are you easily irritated ? Is your sleep pattern disturbed ? Did you lose weight ? If the answer to any of these questions is yes , consider cutting back to one to two drinks per day with meals . As up to 25 per cent of alcohol can be absorbed through the stomach wall , never drink alcohol on an empty stomach . Buffer the effects with fruit juice or water before sending down your first drink . This can prevent the gastric irritation caused by alcohol that can impair digestion . To avoid the dehydrating effects of alcohol , make every other drink at a business function a non-alcoholic one . After an evening of drinks , consume water freely to avoid the dreaded hangover . By weaving these measures into your working life , you will be able to 'lubricate ' business deals while avoiding the slippery slope that can lead to ill-health , poor professional performance and failed marriages . The author is the medical director of the Insead Business Health course .