TAIWAN takes a significant step towards democracy in December with the first fully representative elections to the Legislative Yuan , or parliament . Constitutionally , this body approves the government budget and has authority over a range of government bills . But its powers have rarely been used and its credibility was undermined until last year because more than half its members were elected in mainland China in 1947-48 , before the Nationalist government fled to Taiwan . The old guard retired last December , paving the way for the direct election on December 19 of 125 legislators , six representatives of overseas Chinese communities and 30 'at large ' seats decided by each party 's vote in constituency elections . The new status likely to be accorded to legislators suggests the Yuan will become more like a western parliament with questioning and debate of government policy . Social issues could become more prominent . Division on these and other issues could emerge within the ruling Kuomintang ( KMT ) party . A struggle for supremacy is also possible between the Yuan and the National Assembly , which elects the president and adopts constitutional amendments . But Taiwan 's progress towards full democracy , initiated with the lifting of martial law in 1987 , has so far been relatively smooth and the KMT is expected to easily win a majority of the seats on offer in December . The party will stress the island 's economic success , steady moves to democracy and stable relations with China as reasons to support the government . 'The great majority of voters are , economically speaking , doing well and they are happy , ' said James Chu , KMT spokesman . The main opposition Democratic Progressive Party , meanwhile , has been muted since it campaigned on an independent Taiwan ticket in last year 's elections for the National Assembly . Although most Taiwanese support the existing state of de facto independence , the campaign frightened people who believe China 's threat to use military force to reunify Taiwan if it seeks formal independence . China , of course , still regards Taiwan as a renegade province . The DPP polled only 24 per cent of votes and has decided to campaign on other issues this time . It will attack the government 's USDollars 306bn infrastructure spending plans for being inflationary and likely to lead to tax increases . Mr Hsu Hsin-liang , DPP chairman , says he hopes his party will win 30 per cent of the vote . He complained , justifiably , that in spite of moves to democracy , elections are not fair . The KMT controls Taiwan 's three television stations and , because candidates need to spend Dollars 1m or more getting elected , the KMT 's links with business ensure it ample backing and an in-built majority . The DPP is seeking to tone down its popular image as a group of firebrand radicals . Fist fights in the legislature , which were mainly designed for show and reflected the opposition 's frustration at being in such a minority , are likely to die away . But the DPP 's poor internal organisation suggests it will take time for the party to decide whether it should be a responsible opposition in a dominant party system , or return to merely a protest movement . The independence issue has not been resolved either , although it has been temporarily shelved . According to opinion polls , most Taiwanese are happy with their present state of de facto independence and would welcome eventual reunification with a democratic China . But younger Taiwanese are less sure and are frustrated by Taiwan 's lack of international recognition . Taiwanese also resent the continuing grip on power held by descendants of mainlanders who fled to Taiwan in 1949 but make up less than 15 per cent of the population . Although Mr Lee Teng-hui is the island 's first Taiwanese president , Mr Hau Pei-tsun , who as premier has effective day-to-day control over the island , and most of his senior cabinet are mainlanders . 'The line between Taiwanese and mainlanders is still very clear , ' said Mr Lin Yu-siong , a Taiwanese KMT legislator . This division is likely to come to the fore again next year in the lead up to the KMT 's party congress and is symbolised by a simmering dispute over the method of election for the next presidential elections , due in 1996 . President Lee and his supporters are believed to be in favour of direct elections while conservatives within the administration , many of them mainlanders , would prefer elections through a form of electoral college to limit the popular appeal of the president 's office . The issue is further complicated because elected members of the National Assembly fear their most important function would be redundant if direct elections took place . A heated debate on the issue within the KMT reached impasse in March and the question has been put on hold . In a terse statement , the KMT said an extraordinary meeting of the National Assembly will be held by May 1995 'to select the method of electing the president and vice-president according to public opinion ' .