JUST five years ago Taiwan was an autocracy run by the Nationalist government which fled China 's mainland after the civil war in 1949 . The economy was successful , but highly discriminatory against foreign competition . Relations with the Chinese communists , who still regard Taiwan as a renegade province , remained hostile and Taiwan 's international standing was at a nadir . Today , Taiwan is a quasi democracy with its first Taiwanese , as opposed to Chinese , president in Lee Teng-hui . Its economy remains successful , in spite of world recession , while import and other barriers are slowly being removed . Family visits and trade with China are growing rapidly and the two sides are holding regular , if unofficial , talks . Last month , as a rites of passage for the island 's economic emergence , its application to join the Gatt was accepted for serious consideration . Such rapid change has not come without a price . To cope with new demands , the government budget is in deficit for the first time in nearly 20 years . As affluence has increased , Taiwan 's saving rate has fallen from Asian to western levels , and crime and divorce rates are both rising sharply . Neither is Taiwan 's future as a stable democracy secure . Infighting is taking place within the ruling Kuomintang ( KMT ) about proposed presidential elections in 1996 . This , broadly speaking , pits conservative mainlanders against more liberal Taiwanese party members . The KMT , guaranteed support from government-owned television and big business , enjoys a monopoly on power while the opposition Democratic Progressive Party has yet to prove it can act as a credible oppostion . Meanwhile , China has not withdrawn its threat to use force against Taiwan , especially if the island were formally to declare independence . Although the Taiwanese are sure they do not want reunification with a communist China , they are uncertain how to improve the relationship without radical changes in China 's ideological position . December elections for the legislative yuan , or paliament , mark the next test for the democratic reforms instituted by President Lee since 1987 . The old guard of legislators elected in China in 1947-48 , who sat in the yuan unchallenged and unchallenging for more than 40 years , were retired last year making way for Taiwan 's first fully representative parliamentary elections for 161 seats . The KMT is assured of victory , and campaigning is set to be less explosive than in last year 's election for the lower profile national assembly , which adopts consitutional amendments . In those elections the DPP campaigned to formalise Taiwan 's present de facto independence , leading to angry rebukes from China . But the independence call appeared to worry voters . This time the DPP will concentrate on attacking ballooning government spending and forecast tax increases stemming from a USDollars 303bn six-year national development plan . The plan is designed to redress a decade of neglect of the island's transport and energy facilities , and improve its deteriorating environment . Many of the projects are welcomed , especially those improving traffic jams in the capital , Taipei . But it has been criticised for being hastily drawn up and likely to add to inflation , which is heading for 4-5 per cent - high by Taiwanese standards . Financing the plan pushed the government budget into deficit last year , the first time in recent history . This year 's deficit is forecast to rise 33 per cent to nearly USDollars 14bn . Nevertheless , increased government spending will ensure continued economic growth . This is forecast to rise 7 per cent this year , after 7.3 per cent last year . Unemployment will remain below 2 per cent , helped by a rapidly expanding service sector . A resulting labour shortage suggests recent average wage increases of 10 per cent are set to continue . Taiwan 's economic growth is impressive , especially in the face of recession in its principal export market , the US . But the economy now needs to restructure away from low cost manufacturing , its traditional engine of growth . Since the late 1980s low cost manufacturers have lost competitiveness due to rising land and labour costs and a 50 per cent appreciation in the new Taiwan dollar . This has forced many to relocate to cheaper Asian locations , such as Indonesia , and , especially since relations have improved , China . Although economists agree this process was inevitable , the government is worried it will prevent Taiwan 's industry from upgrading . Government grants and tax credits are being increased to persuade companies to invest in automation and research . But these programmes have so far had mixed success , and Taiwan still largely relies on imported Japanese and US technology . This year has seen another setback as foreign investment has fallen sharply , dropping 32 per cent to Dollars 7.6bn in the first seven months . The decline may be temporary , relecting downturn in Japan , and changes in investment laws . But foreign investment does seem increasingly to be aimed at service , rather than manufacturing industries , suggesting Taiwan 's efforts to upgrade industry , helped by foreign technology transfer may be frustrated . After registering almost no growth in 1990 , exports have recovered , helped by a stable new Taiwanese dollar and increasing exports to China . Because Taiwan maintains a ban on direct links with China , most trade is conducted through Hong Kong . Exports to newly-built Taiwanese factories in China helped lift total trade with China 34 per cent to more than Dollars 4bn in the first seven months of this year . Relations with China have improved markedly since Taiwan lifted its ban on visits to the mainland in 1987 . But the two sides are still separated by huge ideological differences and 40 years of mistrust . Although cultural and unofficial contacts are rising , further progress towards normalising relations will be very slow . Last year Taiwan ended its National Mobilisation for Suppression of the Communist Rebellion , effectively recognising Beijing as the legitimate government for the mainland . Taiwan hoped this would lead to formal recognition by Beijing but China has consistently refused to grant any legitimacy to Taiwan 's government and refuses all offers of official talks or visits . Increasing trade links with China have led to calls from Taiwan's businessmen for bans on the three tongs - direct shipping , air links and postal services - to be lifted . But this would require the two governments' mutual recognition of security arrangements and air service agreements . Even if China agreed to modify its non-recognition of Taiwanese sovereignty , Taiwan may delay lifting the three bans to squeeze further concessions from China at a later stage . Beijing 's continued opposition to the extension of diplomatic recognition to Taiwan by third countries has frustrated the island 's quest for international ties . In August , South Korea , Taiwan 's last diplomatic ally in Asia , withdrew recognition in favour of China . Taiwan now has full diplomatic relations with 29 countries , of which only South Africa is internationally important . But Taiwan has had more success gaining entry to international bodies . As well as the Gatt application , it last year joined the Asia Pacific Economic Conference under the politically neutral title of Chinese Taipei . Growing economic power is also bringing greater informal recognition from European countries , especially those , such as France , which believe their companies can win contracts under the six-year plan . Following the US decision in September to sell up to 150 F-16s to Taiwan , a separate purchase of up to 60 French Mirage fighters is still expected to go ahead . This would further improve Taiwan-French ties , and provide the island with a symbolically important quasi-ally in Europe .