NORTH KOREA signed a long-awaited agreement yesterday to allow international inspection of its secret nuclear facilities , Reuter reports from Vienna . Under the agreement , signed at the International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) in Vienna , North Korea will open all its nuclear sites to IAEA inspectors checking for nuclear weapons development . South Korea , the US and Japan fear communist North Korea is less than one year away from being able to make its own atomic bomb . However , Pyongyang denies that it is developing nuclear weapons . 'To create the openness that is necessary for confidence , regionally and globally , these safeguards must be effective and comprehensive , ' Mr Hans Blix , the IAEA director general , said at the signing ceremony with Hong Gun Pyo , North Korea 's deputy nuclear energy minister . North Korea signed the IAEA 's Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1985 . The treaty requires all signatories to negotiate and sign a further safeguards pact to open their plants to inspection . However , Pyongyang has balked at signing the inspection agreement for years , claiming it felt threatened by US nuclear weapons in South Korea . On New Year 's Eve , both Koreas signed an outline agreement banning nuclear weapons from the peninsula - a few weeks after signing a non-aggression and reconciliation accord . Both the nuclear and non-aggression pacts are due to take effect when the two countries ' prime ministers meet for a sixth round of talks in Pyongyang from February 19 to 21 . The nuclear agreement binds the two states , still formally at war 39 years after the three-year Korean War ended , to establish a joint nuclear control committee within a month of the treaty going into effect . However , one US nuclear expert has warned that North Korea might use the theme of Japan 's potential nuclear ability to produce nuclear weapons as a pretext to go back on the IAEA agreement . Paul Leventhal , president of the Nuclear Control Institute , was reported to have told a US congressional panel in mid-January that he understood a Pyongyang official had told IAEA board members that North Korea might not allow inspection unless Japan gave up its programme to reprocess spent nuclear fuel . After the signing ceremony , Chan Mun Sun , a Foreign Ministry official , said North Korea was still worried by Japan 's nuclear programme . 'Japan is in possession of large quantities of nuclear material , exceeding the purposes of peaceful use of nuclear energy , ' he said . He added that North Korea would insist on the complete removal of all US nuclear weapons from the Korean peninsula and its conversion into a nuclear weapon-free zone . Chan Mun Sun gave no date for when the inspection agreement would enter into force , saying it would take place before the next IAEA board meeting on February 24 .