PRIVATE sector insurance companies are to wrest short-term export credit business in the European Community from state-backed insurers , according to proposals to be presented in two weeks to the EC Council working group on export finance . The proposals , expected to come into force before the beginning of the European Single Market in January next year , are intended to create a level playing field for exporters inside the EC by removing distortions in export credit terms arising from government subsidies . Government export credit insurance would be confined to the underwriting of non-commercial 'political risk ' business . The reforms could lead to a significant expansion of private sector involvement in providing export credit insurance . They are controversial because many state-backed insurers use the profits usually generated from insuring short-term trade to subsidise losses often arising from insuring medium- and long-term business . They are expected to increase the cost of short-term export credit cover , particularly to small companies . They are also expected to lead to pressure inside the OECD for Japan , the US and other leading industrial countries to follow suit . Companies like NCM , the Dutch insurer that bought the short-term credit arm of Britain 's Export Credits Guarantee Department late last year , have naturally welcomed the proposed change . The main resistance has come from Germany , Italy and France , where state-backed companies control effective monopolies on providing export credit insurance . The new regime will apply to 'marketable risk ' , on contracts of up to two years . It will include both political and commercial risk cover on exports to member states of the EC , or other highly credit-worthy countries like the US , Japan or Sweden , but will continue to rely on government-backed reinsurance for political risk in smaller or more volatile markets . 'We plan to start more narrowly , and widen the scope of commercial involvement when the market has caught up with any problems , ' said Mr Allan Dalvin , head of the division for export credits and export promotion in the EC 's external relations directorate . 'We expect most countries to criticise certain areas of our proposals , but to be in favour with the general approach , ' he said . 'Those that have already gone a long way on commercialising will want to go faster . ' The EC pinpoints four main distortions that have prevented private insurers from competing with state-backed organisations in providing export insurance : state guarantees or loans ; free information or facilities ; tax exemptions in many forms ; and monopoly control of reinsurance . Russia will soon clamp down on companies to stop them wasting valuable export credits , Mr Pyotr Aven , the foreign trade minister , said in an interview yesterday , Reuter reports from Moscow . 'We plan to change the system of distributing investment credits fundamentally . We will not allow people to spend hard currency on technical equipment which later disappears , ' he told the daily Trud newspaper . Over the last 20 years foreign machinery worth many millions of dollars has been imported and either left to rust or been stolen . He said vetted companies would only receive credits by bidding for them at auctions .