JAPANESE and South Korean shipbuilders have emerged from the troubled waters of recession aware that the most significant threat to their dominance of the international shipbuilding industry is rivalry between them . Companies in both countries have full order books , rising profits and a lead in new construction and environment-related technologies . While they have survived the market turbulence of the past decade , they no longer regard the European industry as a serious threat , and Japanese builders are turning down orders in the expectation that vessel prices can only increase . Mitsubishi Heavy Industries ( MHI ) , the largest Japanese builder , said 'we were spilling blood a year ago ' , but now 'business is smooth ' . In Korea , the revival has been rapid . Daewoo Shipbuilding , the country's second-biggest yard , was rescued by the government in 1989 , but this year is likely to report its first annual profit since 1983 . The two industries , which say they had a new-found 'harmony ' after years of intense rivalry , are expected to take 70 per cent of the world market in large vessels this decade , and they are setting a course to continue their domination into the next decade . Japan 's big seven , including Mitsui Engineering and Shipbuilding and Hitachi Zosen , had diversified away from shipbuilding after the first oil shock in 1973 and the collapse of new orders . As a percentage of the total of heavy industrial companies ' sales , shipbuilding fell from 22 per cent in 1984 to about 10 per cent last year , but the builders expect the figure will rise slightly and be a source of steady profits . In achieving these results , the companies have steered clear of trade friction with Washington , which decided two years ago not to proceed with a formal investigation into allegations by US builders that Japan's 'restructuring plans ' were a guise for unfair government subsidies . Government assistance has certainly played an important role in reviving the two industries , but Japanese and Korean companies now control their own destiny , having last year captured about 65 per cent of the world market . Replacement demand for oil tankers built in the early and mid-1970s has combined with new demand for vessels to fill company order books - Japanese companies had an order backlog last September 14.2 per cent higher than the previous year . Demand is also coming from an increased emphasis on environmental safety , leading to changes in vessel design and increased demand for vessels to carry liquid natural gas ( LNG ) , seen by Asian governments as an alternative energy source to oil and coal . US legislation , prompted by the Exxon Valdez disaster in March 1989 , requires the gradual introduction of double-hulled tankers , regarded as less prone to spills but 20 per cent more expensive to build . Meanwhile , officials at the Japan Marine Research Institute expect demand for 20 to 25 new LNG ships by 1995 and close to 50 by the year 2000 . Japanese builders have a natural advantage because of about 18 new LNG projects likely to produce demand for vessels , 10 have been backed by Japanese energy companies , while South Korean utility companies are funding three . The Japanese industry has survived in spite of fears that shipbuilding would be transferred to lower-cost countries such as China , largely by the introduction of labour-saving technology . In 1973 , a very large crude carrier ( VLCC ) took a Japanese company about 1m man-hours to build , but the figure is now close to 270,000 man-hours for the most efficient yard run by Hitachi Zosen , one of the leading builders . The big savings have been in welding , which is about 65 per cent automated , and steel cutting , about 80 per cent automated . The second advantage for the Japanese companies is that they are essentially rebuilding the fleets of the large Japanese shipping lines . These shippers have traditionally placed orders with Japanese builders , without much regard to cost , which is now about 10 per cent higher than Korean or Taiwanese yards . The Korean Shipbuilders Association said a VLCC now cost about Dollars 100m , compared with Dollars 38m in 1986 . It was a measure of the Japanese yards' confidence that Nippon Yusen , the Japanese flag carrier , last year ordered two bulk carriers from a Taiwanese company , the China Shipbuilding Corporation , the first it has ordered from outside Japan since the end of the Second World War . Nippon Yusen said Japanese yards had told it they would not be free to handle that type of vessel for two or three years . The determination of Japanese companies to limit supply has created opportunities for Korea . 'The Japanese can not continue to expand , ' says Mr Cho Choong Hooy , executive vice-president for sales at Hyundai Heavy Industries , Korea 's largest builder . With many of the problems facing the Korean industry in the late 1980s now resolved , they are set to reverse the trend of falling market share . This decline saw the share of outstanding international orders placed at Korean yards fall from 30.2 per cent in 1987 to 24 per cent in 1990 . An important change for the Korean industry has been in labour relations . The violent clashes between workers and riot police which had seemed set to become an annual ritual at the end of the 1980s have now largely subsided . The effects of improved labour relations are clearly visible on the company 's accounts . Samsung Heavy Industries , like Daewoo Shipbuilding , will return its first profit since the early 1980s . Halla Heavy Industries last year report-ed its first profit since 1977 . The improvement in labour relations has made foreign shipping lines more confident about placing orders at Korean yards , as the likelihood of a delay in delivery - an important consideration for fleet operators - is now remote . This has removed a traditional advantage for the very punctual Japanese yards and reduces the threat of competition from Chinese yards which have also earned a reputation for tardiness . Japanese and Korean builders expect longer-term but limited competition from China and some competition in LNG carrier construction from French builders , which had dominated the sector two decades ago . In the 1970s , about 24 yards worldwide were capable of building LNG ships , but now there are only 12 , eight of them in Japan . Having established themselves as the world 's second largest shipbuilders , the Korean yards now have become less aggressive competitors . Japanese executives say that Korean companies now understand the importance of 'harmony ' in the industry - the implication is that the deep discounting of the past is over . 'It used to be that the Koreans would ask you what your best price had been from the Japanese and then they would just offer you 10 per cent less ' , said one foreign shipping executive in Seoul . 'But now there is not the same hunger to carve out market share . ' -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- SHIPBUILDING ORDERS ( End-June 1991 ) -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- Country Gross Tonnage ( m ) -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- Japan 15.16 South Korea 6.96 Denmark 1.93 Germany 1.84 Italy 1.52 Taiwan 1.38 Yugoslavia 1.29 Brazil 1.21 China * 1.01 Romania * 1.00 Spain 0.99 Poland 0.98 France 0.78 UK 0.55 Finland 0.34 Turkey 0.30 USSR * 0.30 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- * Information incomplete -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- Source : Lloyds Register of Shipping -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --