MICROSOFT , the US software group , yesterday reported a 45 per cent increase in first-quarter earnings to outperform Wall Street expectations after being boosted by strong sales of the Windows software program for personal computers . Net income for the quarter rose to Dollars 209m , or 70 cents per share , from Dollars 144m or 50 cents per share last year . Revenues were Dollars 818m , up from Dollars 581m . Microsoft 's growth reflects booming sales of personal computers in the US driven by lower prices . It has proved to be one of the few companies to benefit from the price war among personal computer manufacturers . The quarterly results 'reflect continued acceptance of the Windows operating system , ' said Mr Frank Gaudette , Microsoft 's executive vice-president and chief financial officer . Windows provides on-screen graphics which make personal computers easier and faster to use and has become the standard operating system for personal computers . It is rapidly replacing Microsoft 's Dos as the most widely used operating system . Sales of applications programs for the Apple Macintosh and the Microsoft Windows operating system were also strong , Mr Gaudette said . Total revenues for applications for Windows were 118 per cent greater than in the same period last year . Microsoft is preparing to launch a new high-performance version of Windows , called Windows NT , early next year . This will incorporate features that take advantage of the improved performance of the latest microprocessor chips . The new program is geared toward corporate PC users with computer networks . It will compete directly with AT & T 's Unix operating system and its derivatives . Microsoft said its research and development costs rose to Dollars 105m in the quarter , against Dollars 74m in the same period last year . Sales and marketing costs advanced to Dollars 264m from Dollars 178m and general and administrative costs from Dollars 21m to Dollars 25m . Founded in 1975 , Microsoft has become the largest producer of software for personal computers worldwide . Its success has brought enormous wealth to the company 's founder , Mr Bill Gates , who is listed this year by Forbes magazine as the richest person in the US , with assets estimated at Dollars 6.3bn . However , Microsoft 's dominant role in the software industry has also attracted the attention of the Federal Trade Commission , which is conducting an anti-trust investigation of the company 's activities . Microsoft has said that it will co-operate with the commission .