US and European acquisitions of Japanese companies could rise sharply as foreign groups take advantage of weakness in Japanese stock and property markets . Investment bankers in Tokyo said an increasing number of foreign companies were hiring advisers to seek potential partners . They said overseas groups were particularly interested in acquiring distributors for their products to increase their knowledge of the Japanese market . Pharmaceutical companies are especially active . Japanese purchases of foreign companies , however , still heavily outweigh foreign acquisitions of Japanese groups , in spite of the end of Japan's 1980s speculative boom . Last year , foreign companies bought just 14 Japanese companies worth a total of Y178bn ( Pounds 794.64m ) against 259 Japanese purchases of overseas companies worth Y684bn , said Daiwa Securities , the stockbroker . But corporate finance specialists said the number and value of deals would increase in 1992 . 'The number of deals could double this year , ' said Mr Christopher Mackenzie , a Tokyo-based director of J. Henry Schroder Wagg , the UK merchant bank . 'More than half our time is spent advising foreign companies on potential Japanese acquisitions , compared with 25 per cent last year and 10 per cent in 1990 . ' According to Daiwa Securities the market is active 'below the surface ' , meaning many deals are being discussed but have yet to be announced . However , Mr Isao Matsuura , a director of Sanwa Bank , sounded a note of caution . He said the level of foreign interest in making an acquisition had not changed dramatically . But the decline in Japanese asset prices means foreign companies are in a better financial position to complete a purchase . Industries in which foreign companies are keen to make acquisitions include pharmaceuticals , chemicals and some specialist areas of machine tools , said Mr Matsuura . In the past few weeks , two deals have been announced . Electronic Data Systems , a unit of General Motors of the US and a developer of computer systems , has said it would take a Y3.75bn stake in Japan Systems , a troubled Japanese computer systems company quoted on the over-the-counter market . EDS plans to inject money into the Japanese company in return for shares which would give it a 19.9 per cent stake . Japan Systems , hit by a sharp decline in demand for software , will use the funds to repay bank debts . Pfizer , the US drugs and chemicals group , has announced it will buy Koshin Medical , the privately owned Japanese distributor of medical equipment produced by Schneider , a Pfizer subsidiary . The price was reported to be around Y3bn . Even after a 45 per cent decline in the Japanese stock market in the past two years , Japanese equities are more highly valued in terms of price/earnings multiples than shares in the US and Europe . However , some large Japanese groups are ready to sell non-core businesses to foreign buyers . And the owners of privately controlled small and medium-sized companies are increasingly looking to realise some or all of their investment . Mr Thomas Lynch , a senior manager in Tokyo at Peat Marwick Finance Advisory , an arm of the international accountancy firm , said foreign companies were interested in distribution and there was a ' a lot of pressure ' to sell on the part of Japanese owners because the industry faced rationalisation with the liberalisation of many regulations .