A WRITER of my acquaintance , Neil Lyndon , is a man with a peculiar mission . He wants to know how many people there are in the world . Or , more particularly , how we know how many people there are in the world . Or , still more particularly , how those who say they know how many people there are in the world , can justify their claim . So he rang up the office of population and censuses at the United Nations , and asked an information officer there if he was right in thinking that the population of the earth now exceeded 6bn . 'Er . . . that ca n't be right , ' said the population counter . 'It 's more like 5 1/2 bn , Is n't it ? ' China , one imagines , is the source of much of the confusion . My friend asked the man at the UN how they knew the population of China . For example , when was the last census held in China , and how was it carried out ? 'Oh dear , ' said the man from the UN . ' I very much doubt you could find anyone who could answer that question . ' So my friend rang up the Chinese Embassy in London . No one answered . They must have been one short . It is , one must concede to Lyndon , a big , and perhaps even an important question . Since we tend to be given so many statistics expressed as a percentage of the population of the world - what percentage have AIDS , for example - it is a little unsettling to discover that they are all based on ignorance . Unsettling perhaps , but not surprising . Stock markets for example , seem based entirely on the principle of general ignorance about everything of importance . If the true facts about corporate performance were universally available and understood there would be very little difference of opinion , and hence very little room for trading . This sort of ignorance is acceptable , because it is somehow abstract and intangible . But general ignorance is expanding to cover the most practical and down to earth problems . Take , for example , something as seemingly simple as the workings of the internal combustion engine . It used to be the case that almost anyone who drove a car would have a basic idea of how the engine worked . They could imagine , armed with the necessary diagram , how the thing might be put right , if it stuttered , stalled , or conked out . Few owners of a modern car would have any idea what to do in a similar situation . Indeed , the electronics have become so complex and computerised , that I much doubt if the average garage owner has a clear idea of how to solve a breakdown in a modern engine . Many parts have to be sent back to the manufacturers , the only people who understand the sophisticated electronic management systems . I suppose the retort of the car manufacturers would be that their customers have ceased to have the same need to know how engines work , because the things are now so much more reliable than they were . But still , as one drives one of these gently humming beauties , it is difficult not to feel uneasy , that one is somehow a cog in a machine beyond one 's comprehension . This is a particular example of a universal problem . Increasingly , one is told to 'trust the expert . ' The very word 'expert ' has become something of a commonplace in newspaper accounts of otherwise inexplicable events , the readers being reassured that such and such an 'expert ' or in the tabloid press , 'boffin ' has come up with such and such a theory , which explains everything . The 'experts ' sometimes work under other names such as 'doctor' or 'garage mechanic ' or 'psephoplogist ' or 'environmental health officer ' . It would be pleasant always to believe that these experts are trading in more than the blend of half understood facts , ignorance , and prejudice which inform the beliefs of the rest of us . But that would amount to an act of faith , just as big as that required to believe that the average garage mechanic can mend our car engine , to believe that the United Nations office of populations and censuses really knows how many people there are in the world , and that there will always be someone to answer the telephone in the Chinese Embassy . Dominic Lawson is editor of the Spectator .