THE UK is overwhelmingly a property-owning society , with the private rental sector accounting for only 7.4 per cent of the total housing stock . But for a variety of reasons , many people are now becoming tenants . Some foresee a prolonged period of low inflation and high real interest rates , so that owning property may not be the good deal it was for much of the 1980s . Others have sold their homes and are renting on a short-term basis while looking for the right property to buy . Once you have settled the economic arguments , the main drawback to renting is that you are living in someone else 's property . You are unlikely to be able to redecorate the place to your taste , and if you have children ( or lots of parties ) you will be constantly worried about wear and tear to the property . Until the 1988 Housing Act , it was arguably more desirable to be a tenant than a landlord . But , as the accompanying article explains , the renting sector shifted in favour of landlords once the Act had come into force on January 15 , 1989 , doing away with protected tenancies for new tenants . A landlord , instead of needing grounds for possession in order to evict a tenant , can now evict them at two months ' notice once the first six-month period under the new assured shorthold tenancy is up . Finding a property to rent People usually find a flat or house through the classified columns , estate agents or a letting agency . The advantage of the last is convenience , though the drawback is that you pay for the service . ( If you find a property through an estate agent , the person wishing to let it pays . ) The collapse of a number of letting agencies in the past few years has highlighted the risk that tenants could lose their deposit . There are no legal requirements , comparable to those required of solicitors or financial advisers , for the holding of deposits in separate client accounts . John Andrews was one of the lucky ones . He used the letting agency , Busy Bees , to rent a flat in Finsbury Park , London , but was upset about the amount of money extracted from him : 'They wanted one month 's deposit , a six-week arrangement fee for finding the place , and one month 's rent in advance . I had to write out a cheque for near on Pounds 1,000 . ' Busy Bees went bust a year ago . Mr Andrews had already moved on and recovered his deposit from the agency , but others lost the money they had left with it . Ensure that the letting or estate agent is a member of the Association of Residential Letting Agents , or the National Association of Estate Agents . The association gives guidelines to member firms , including the stipulation that tenants ' deposits be put in a separate account . You are entitled to have this deposit returned to you with interest . Do not pay a fee to a letting agency until it finds the place you are renting - it is illegal for the agency to extract money from you before then . The tenancy agreement If you rented on or after January 15 , 1989 , you will fall into one of three categories of tenant : 1 . Assured shorthold tenant . This is now the most common form of tenancy arrangement . Your tenancy is for a fixed six-month period , during which you can not be evicted . At the end of the six months , the landlord can evict you but has to give you two months notice . 2 . Assured tenant : This gives you greater protection . You have a right to stay for a fixed period of time unless the landlord has grounds for possession - there are about 20 grounds . The rent can be assessed by the landlord once a year . 3 . Non-assured tenant : If you are neither of the above , you are likely to be a non-assured tenant . People who have a resident landlord may not realise that they fall into this category . Those who do not pay rent , or have a company let , are also non-assured tenants . You have few rights as a non-assured tenant , and could be given only four weeks notice to leave , although your landlord would have to go to court to evict you , according to Shelter . Many people do not realise that a verbal agreement is just as legally binding as a written agreement . 'In many cases it can be better , ' said John Goodwin , of Shelter , 'because a written agreement tends to have a lot of exclusion clauses . ' But take a friend who can act as a witness to back you up if necessary . If you sign a written agreement with your landlord , have it looked at by a solicitor , the Citizen 's Advice Bureau or a Housing/Law advice centre . Moving in You will be required to pay a deposit , usually equivalent to a month 's rent . You should certainly not agree to more than two months ' rent unless your tenancy is more than 21 months . Shelter 's advice is that , when paying the deposit , you get a written statement from the landlord , stating clearly how much deposit has been paid and whether or not it is returnable . Also , get the landlord to state what it could be used for , such as breakages or unpaid rent . If there is no inventory , take one yourself and get the landlord to sign it . If you are presented with an inventory , carefully check all the items , and if you notice defects on some items , tell the landlord - you do not want to be told that the bath has to be replaced because you chipped it , when you had noticed that it was chipped when you moved in . Rents The new Housing Act means that landlords can charge the market rent , rather than a 'fair ' rent as previously required . They can also review the rent every year . Under the assured or assured shorthold tenancy , you are not eligible to take an appeal for a fair rent to a Rent Office . If you think you are being charged above market rent , you should contact the Rent Assessment Committee or your local Citizen 's Advice Bureau . Problems A common problem is a refusal by the landlord to pay for necessary maintenance of the property . But since he is obliged to do structural repairs and to ensure that the amenities are working , you can take him to court . The Small Claims Court will resolve disputes involving sums up to Pounds 1,000 for a small fee . Another common problem is that the landlord withholds the deposit when you move out , saying that it will be needed to clear up the mess you left behind . A practical , but not strictly legal , way of anticipating this problem is to withhold your final month 's rent to offset against the potential loss of the deposit . If disputes arise contact : National Association of Citizens Advice Bureaux : 071 833 2181 ; Shelter : 071 253 0202 ( free booklet on private tenants' rights ) ; Federation of Independent Advice Centres , 071 274 1839 .