THE US economy grew at a surprisingly robust annual rate of 3.8 per cent in the final quarter of last year , the fastest pace since 1988 , the Commerce Department reported yesterday . The growth mainly reflected a surge in consumption , which grew at an annual rate of 4.3 per cent relative to the previous quarter . The economy grew by 2.1 per cent in 1992 as a whole , a sharp rebound after a decline of 1.2 per cent in 1991 . However , senior advisers to President Bill Clinton believe the figures overstate the economy 's underlying growth rate and are continuing to urge a modest economic stimulus worth Dollars 15bn-Dollars 20bn ( Pounds 9.8bn-Pounds 13bn ) this year to ensure growth does not falter again , as it did in 1991 and 1992 . After meeting yesterday with Mr Alan Greenspan , the Federal Reserve chairman , Mr Clinton welcomed the figures . However , he said there was also ' a lot of troubling news about jobs ' - a reference to a wave of recent job cuts at leading US companies including International Business Machines and Sears Roebuck . The expansion in the fourth quarter followed growth at an annual rate of 3.4 per cent in the third quarter . It was the seventh successive quarter of growth after a brief contraction in the winter of 1990-91 . Testifying before the Senate budget committee , Mr Greenspan said economic growth rates in the next six months were likely to be 'somewhat lower ' than in the fourth quarter . He also signalled support for Mr Clinton 's target of a Dollars 145bn cut in the budget deficit within four years . ' I do n't find that number to be off base , ' he said . However deficit reduction would be seen as credible in financial markets only if it involved specific cuts in programmes rather than vague 'caps ' or targets . Economists said the breakdown of growth was encouraging . It did not reflect temporary factors such as a rebuilding of inventories by companies . The growth of consumption reflected a bigger than expected rise in disposable incomes rather than a further reduction in the personal savings rate , which stabilised at about 4.5 per cent . Investment spending was also stronger than anticipated . Corporate equipment investment grew at an annual rate of 11.7 per cent relative to the previous quarter , while residential investment surged by 29 per cent , reflecting a recovery in the housing market . Inflation remained subdued , with a broad index rising at an annual rate of 2.8 per cent . Mr David Wyss , chief economist at DRI/McGraw-Hill , the forecasting group , said : 'We ca n't keep up growth at 3.8 per cent . But decent growth of something like 3 per cent is likely this quarter . ' Mr Bill Griggs , a Wall Street bond market analyst , said growth might be as low as 2 per cent at an annual rate in the current quarter , reflecting overspending by consumers at Christmas . Editorial comment , Page 15 Wall Street , Page 31