THE FOLLOWING is a selection from Peter Lynch 's golden rules for investors . Your investor 's edge is not something you get from Wall Street experts . It is something you already have . You can outperform the experts if you use your edge by investing in companies or industries you already understand . Owning stocks is like having children - do n't get involved with more than you can handle . The part-time stockpicker probably has time to follow eight to 12 companies , and to buy and sell shares as conditions warrant . There do not have to be more than five companies in the portfolio at any one time . If you can not find any companies that you think are attractive , put your money in the bank until you discover some . Never invest in a company without understanding its finances . The biggest losses in stocks come from companies with poor balance sheets . Avoid hot stocks in hot industries . Great companies in cold , non-growth industries are consistent big winners . A stock market decline is as routine as a January blizzard in Colorado . If you are prepared , it can not hurt you . A decline is a great opportunity to pick up the bargains left behind by investors who are fleeing the storm in panic . Everyone has the brainpower to make money in stocks . Not everyone has the stomach . If you are susceptible to selling everything in a panic you ought to avoid stocks and stock funds altogether . Nobody can predict interest rates , the future direction of the economy or the stock market . Dismiss all such forecasts and concentrate on what is actually happening to the companies in which you have invested . If you study 10 companies , you will find one for which the story is better than expected . If you study 50 , you will find five . There are always pleasant surprises to be found in the stock market . If you do not study any companies , you have the same chance of success at buying stocks as you do in a poker game if you bet without looking at your cards . Time is on your side when you own shares of superior companies . You can afford to be patient .