AFTER almost 22 years of federation , Dubai 's defence is inextricably bound up not only with that of the United Arab Emirates , but in a wider sense with that of the Gulf Co-operation Council ( GCC ) too . So defence forces stationed in Dubai are referred to , by virtue of their geographical location at the centre of the federation , as Central Military Command ( CMC ) , even though direct authority over CMC is via a chain of command containing only names from Dubai 's ruling family , the Al Maktoum . CMC 's ground forces consist of as many as 15,000 men , out of a total UAE federal army of 50,000 , according to the London-based International Institute for Strategic Studies . Up to 80 per cent of CMC is comprised of Omanis from the Batinah coast in the northern part of the country , and the balance from Dubai . The ground forces include an armoured regiment equipped with Italian-made Ottomelara tanks of German design with 105mm guns and British Scorpion light-track tanks ; two infantry brigades ; and an anti-tank regiment plus artillery . The air force includes an air defence regiment and the Air Wing which has British-made Hawk and Italian Aeromacchi fighter-trainers . CMC 's titular commander-in-chief is Sheikh Ahmed Bin Rashid Al Maktoum , the youngest of the four sons of Sheikh Rashid , Dubai 's former ruler and brother of Sheikh Mohammad , the UAE 's minister of defence who was recently promoted to full general by Sheikh Zayed , the UAE president and ruler of Abu Dhabi . Sheikh Mohammad is reported to take a very close interest in CMC , as well as exercising financial control . The two deputy commanders are Sheikh Ahmed Al Maktoum and Sheikh Butti Al Maktoum , brothers who are close relations of Sheikh Maktoum , Dubai 's ruler . Both deputy commanders have passed through Britain 's officer cadet training college at Mons near Aldershot . Of the two , Sheikh Butti is the one most frequently referred to as the day-to-day commander of CMC . All of the other senior officers , NCOs and warrant officers are from Dubai , although there are Egyptian and Sudanese training officers plus a few British , seconded or on contract . The historical role of a Dubai army has been to protect Dubai itself and , given the authority wielded by its ruling family , the tradition of retaining command and control is very much alive . But today 's demands on the UAE impose their own realities on CMC to which it has responded . During the Gulf war , CMC would have been in a state of complete readiness . It also provided a large squadron - some 120 men - for a battalion-size force which the UAE contributed to the US-led coalition . This battalion was engaged at Khafji on the Saudi-Kuwaiti border , and took some casualties . Today , CMC has a large squadron as part of the UAE force attached to the UN forces in Somalia . Although Abu Dhabi is thought to bear some of the cost of maintaining CMC , the overwhelming charge is to Dubai 's account , and this represents a significant part of Dubai 's direct contribution to the UAE federal budget . The fact that Sheikh Mohammad , the UAE defence minister , is from Dubai also gives CMC a political dimension . Like other senior figures in the federation , he is reported to be a strong supporter for greater defence co-operation at more levels , especially where defence overlaps with political and diplomatic issues .