BARELY 10 days after the departure of thousands of businessmen expected at Dubai 's International Aerospace Exhibition next week , thousands of a different kind of visitor are scheduled to pour into Dubai from India , Pakistan , Saudi Arabia and other Gulf states to hear pop star Michael Jackson at a sell-out concert in a local soccer stadium . Such is the magnetic pull of Dubai and its government-sponsored promotional organisations - notably the Dubai Commerce and Tourism Promotion Board , the Dubai National Air Travel Agency , and the travel management division of Emirates , Dubai 's airline . Attendances at both exhibition and concert are almost certain to be inflated thanks to the timely decision last month by the Dubai government to open the emirate for short visits to white-collar residents of all Gulf Co-operation Council countries regardless of nationality . Previously only citizens of GCC countries - Bahrain , Kuwait , Oman , Qatar , and Saudi Arabia - had been allowed into Dubai without a visit or transit visa provided by a Dubai-based sponsor . Dubai 's success in selling itself as a tourist and conference-exhibition centre is reflected in the aggregate figures for local hotel occupancies . These show the total number of visitors - business and tourist - increasing by 50 per cent between 1990 and 1992 , despite the temporary but dramatic fall-off caused by the Gulf war . The majority of these visitors are staying in deluxe or first-class hotels , but the biggest proportional increase in the same period - more than 250 per cent - have been visitors at the lower-income end of the market . Dubai 's Promotion Board now maintains offices in seven countries for North America , Europe , Hong Kong and Japan . An example of its success is that Dubai now features on the books of 38 German tour operators alone . The general manager of Frankfurt-based Airtours said in September there had been a steady increase in the German demand for holidays to the Emirates . But the reasons he gave - 'very high standards of quality , service , and security , ' - apply to all the countries where Dubai has made a visible impact on both the summer and winter tourist markets . And because Dubai is a cosmopolitan city , language is not a problem for any visitor , regardless of nationality . Russians and citizens of other former Soviet republics are a fairly recent addition to Dubai 's tourist market . They descend by the planeload on Dubai and neighbouring emirates , not wearing uniforms , but selling them - along with medals , Russian dolls and other paraphernalia . Dubai 's traders welcome them . They barter the Russian goods for television sets , radios and all kinds of consumer durables . Those who have seen the Russians ' departure say there is not a square inch of aircraft aisle or emergency exit which is not packed to the ceiling with man and metal for the home market . Many of Dubai 's existing five-star hotels are expanding . The luxury Jebel Ali hotel could be adding 100 rooms to its present 275 ; and the Hatta Fort hotel , an oasis in Dubai 's desert and mountain hinterland , has doubled capacity and added a conference facility . J. P. Marriott opened a five-star hotel last September and a new Forte Grand opens next April . The luxury hotel construction spree is probably not over yet . The chief executive of Dubai 's Promotion Board , Mr Khalid Bin Sulayem , says his organisation 's efforts are moving towards 'quality ' tourism and incentive travel visitors . It was the Promotion Board which intitiated the new entry freedoms for GCC residents , an initiative which has already been endorsed by GCC regional chambers of commerce . But the icing on the cake for Dubai 's leisure market must surely be the three all-grass golf courses , and their related facilities . Emirates Golf Club , opened in 1988 , is the home to the PGA Desert Classic . Dubai Creek Golf & Yacht Club , completed only last November , has a flood-lit three-hole course and driving range in addition to its 18-hole course . The newest of all , Dubai Golf & Racing Club at Nad Al Shiba on the desert outskirts of Dubai city , has a nine-hole flood-lit course next to the racetrack and paddock . Dubai Racing Club , which owns and manages the race course will have its first full season this winter . It is internationally recognised , which means pedigrees of owners appear in catalogues everywhere and jockeys registered in Dubai can race anywhere . Thoroughbreds trained in Dubai are now entering - and being placed - in races in Europe . And Dubai Racing Club 's facilities for club members and sponsors , including hospitality boxes , make facilities at Europe's traditional race courses seem very inadequate by comparison .