THE suggestion by Mr Henning Christophersen , the European Community's economic affairs commissioner , of 2 per cent growth in the EC next year was branded as over-optimistic by private sector economists yesterday amid signs that it is incompatible with the latest internal EC commission forecasts . On Monday , Mr Christophersen told journalists at the EC finance ministers' meeting in Luxembourg that EC-wide growth could be between 1.5 per cent and 2 per cent next year if the latest German growth forecasts turned out to be accurate . However , it emerged while Mr Christophersen was making his prediction that commission forecasters in Brussels were starting a two-day meeting with colleagues from EC member states armed with internal commission forecasts pointing to less than 1 per cent EC-wide growth in 1994 . Mr Christophersen appeared to base his remarks on projections by five of Germany 's six leading economic research institutes forecasting 1.5 per cent growth in Germany next year . Such a growth rate would boost EC-wide economic growth by about 0.45 per cent . But , according to EC officials , the commissioner seemed not to take into account internal commission forecasts that have downgraded 1994 growth from 1.25 per cent published in June to less than 1 per cent . While this week 's forecasters ' meeting might lead to an upgrading of the commission forecast , past experience suggests that any change would be small and typically around 0.2 percentage points . Mr Christophersen 's suggestion that growth could reach 2 per cent surprised EC finance ministries yesterday because he had not mentioned it during Monday 's meeting . Private sector economists also doubted whether his upbeat forecast was soundly based . Mr George Magnus , international economist of S G Warburg Securities in London , said Mr Christophersen 's forecast was 'wishful thinking ' and that 1 per cent EC growth 'was just about achievable ' . Mr Martin Hufner , chief economist of Bayerische Vereinsbank in Munich , said 2 per cent growth 'looked very optimistic ' . The German growth forecasts on which Mr Christophersen based his remarks are contentious . They were rejected by one of the six German institutes and criticised by the association of German private banks as being too optimistic .