A CONFRONTATION is looming between the west and Asia on human rights . Next week a United Nations world conference on human rights - only the second of its kind since the second world war - opens in Vienna . Several Asian governments say they intend using the conference to expose what they consider to be western hypocrisy and selectivity on human rights questions . In particular they seem intent on confronting a new US administration which they feel is intent on increasingly linking human rights and trade and aid issues . Malaysia and Singapore have been making the running in articulating the so-called Asian approach to human rights questions . This encompasses two main elements : Cultural relativism . While accepting certain basic human rights , such as the right against arbitrary killing and torture , human rights should also reflect local cultural and historical factors . Singapore officials accuse the west of arrogantly imposing its concepts of human rights on the rest of the world . They say the west 's smugness must be punctured and contradictions of its position exposed . Asia must have a different approach : it should carefully sift through western inspired ideas on human rights to find elements acceptable in the local context . Malaysia says it will not accept finger wagging by the west . 'Each country is entitled to its own perception of human rights and forcing developing countries to follow the western perception is unfair and unjust , ' says Mr Musa Hitam , a leader of the Malaysian delegation to the conference . Economic development . This emphasises that human rights can not be divorced from economic development . At a conference in Bangkok earlier this year Asian countries signed a declaration saying economic development was ' a universal and inalienable right and an integral part of fundamental human rights ' . 'Malaysia views development as very basic to human rights , ' says Mr Musa . 'Civil and political rights should come almost automatically after development has been achieved . ' Both these ideas are likely to come under fire in Vienna . Human rights groups dispute that there is a consensus among Asian countries on the issue : for instance , they say , Japan differed radically with China on human rights at the Bangkok conference . Ms Sidney Jones , of the human rights body Asia Watch , says human rights must be seen as an international issue . 'If governments and their security forces are primarily responsible for human rights abuses , it is illusory to think that the same governments are best equipped to protect human rights .. the only possible way .. is to acknowledge from the outset that responsibility for protection transcends national boundaries . ' Amnesty International accuses governments in Asia of condemning the Vienna conference to failure . Mr Pierre Sane , Amnesty 's secretary general , says many governments in Asia consider international protection and monitoring of human rights as interference and an attempt by the west to cut their competitiveness . 'What is at stake here is the rights of the workers in Asia , ' says Mr Sane . 'If they are respected , products coming from Asia will be more expensive . And therefore the economic competitiveness of countries like China , Indonesia , Malaysia - the new and emerging tigers - will be threatened . 'It is a very linear concept of development whereby you fill the bellies first , and then you provide people with freedom , ' says Mr Sane . 'Maybe 100 years ago the universal consciousness could accept that to industrialise you crush a whole generation . But it is not acceptable in 1993 . '