HOPES for further , sustained cuts in German interest rates were given a fillip yesterday after the Bundesbank released figures showing that broad money supply - traditionally the German central bank 's key indicator in the battle against inflation - fell in January on an annualised basis . Economists had expected the rate of growth in M3 to fall significantly from December . But the annualised , seasonally adjusted 2.3 per cent drop in M3 - following an 8.7 per cent rise in December - took observers by surprise when it was announced yesterday , prompting an increase in German bond prices in expectation of further interest rate cuts . The Bundesbank said the figure was distorted , taking care to emphasise that the drop reflected a number of special factors , chiefly the reversal of the currency flows which had bloated M3 growth in the autumn of last year . The Bundesbank 's currency market interventions helped send annualised M3 growth to a record 10.3 per cent last October . Another reason was purely statistical - the Bundesbank calculates the growth with reference to the previous three month 's figures . As these were exceptionally high , it was inevitable that the January annualised figure would be vastly improved on the December M3 number . Economists were , however , expecting growth of around 4 per cent , not a fall . Despite the Bundesbank 's attempts to play down the significance of the number , economists were encouraged , predicting that the Bundesbank would be able to meet its growth target for M3 this year . Last year M3 grew at 9.4 per cent compared to a target range of 3.5 to 5.5 per cent , the worst performance since targeting was introduced 18 years before . The target was subsequently raised to 4.5 to 6.5 per cent for 1993 . The Bundesbank said that on a straightforward year-on-year basis , M3 - which includes cash , current accounts and short-term deposits - grew by 7.5 per cent . Measured against the previous six months , it grew by 6.5 per cent . Norway and Ireland both cut short-term interest rates yesterday , Our Foreign Staff adds . Norway 's central bank cut the key overnight lending rate to its lowest level since the rate was introduced in 1986 . The cut in the benchmark rate , the third this month , was to 9.25 per cent from 9.50 per cent , from Monday . The move followed a period of strength in the krone and low money market rates . Norway uncoupled the krone from the European currency unit on December 10 , and the currency has since fallen . The central bank also lowered the rate for overnight deposits , the credit rate , to 8.25 per cent from 8.50 per cent . The key rate reached 25 per cent last November during turbulence in the Scandinavian currency markets . Meanwhile , in Ireland the central bank cut its short-term lending facility ( STF ) by three quarters of a point to 13 per cent , its first reduction since it was raised by 3 points last September at the beginning of the ERM crisis . The STF was restored only two weeks ago at its suspension level of 13.75 per cent , having been withdrawn in November as the currency crisis deepened . It was temporarily replaced by an overnight lending facility which at times soared as high as 100 per cent , as the bank sought to ward off speculation on the punt . See Lex , Page 24