IF YOU ARE not domiciled in the UK , you will not pay tax on any income or property which you earn or own outside the country . But if you buy a house or property in Britain , you could become liable to UK tax on the money needed for the purchase ; on any profit made when you sell it ; or if you die while owning it . There are , however , legitimate ways of avoiding these levies . If you need to bring in money to buy a house , the best way is to do this before you become UK-resident ; then , no tax is due . But if you can not , there are ways of converting a fund mixed with untaxed income and gains into one that is non-taxable . Examples include setting up a back-to-back loan , making a gift offshore , or creating an offshore trust . If you have brought in substantial sums of money from a mixed fund , you could be liable to tax already - although it could be difficult to work out how much . In my experience , however , the Inland Revenue is fair in such circumstances and often willing to negotiate if you co-operate . Once you have decided how to buy your house , you should consider whether you will have to pay capital gains tax if you profit from selling it . If you plan to live there , it could be exempt from tax as your main or only residence . But if you have another residence , anywhere else in the world , you should ask the Revenue to treat your new house as your tax-exempt residence . This request should be made within two years of buying the property ; after that , the Revenue could decide not to accept your choice . If the exemption is not available , you might consider buying the property through a non-UK trust . CGT is not charged on gains made by an offshore trust set up by a non-UK domiciled settlor . The next thing to consider is inheritance tax . If you are going to buy the house in your own name , or in the name of an offshore trust , then inheritance tax at a maximum rate of 40 per cent will be payable when you die unless you leave the property to your spouse . If you decide not to do this , or are concerned that you and your spouse could die together , you can take out term insurance , especially if your stay in the UK is unlikely to be long - say , five years at the most . If this solution fails to suit , you can avoid IHT simply by owning the house through an offshore company . You will then effectively have swapped a UK chargeable asset ( your house ) for a non-UK , non-chargeable asset ( shares ) in the offshore company . In theory , this solution is simple but , in practice , there are disadvantages . You must not , for example , be seen to be managing or controlling the company from Britain . If you do , you will make it UK-resident and defeat the purpose . Another pitfall is an income tax charge under the benefit-in-kind legislation . The Revenue has said it will levy tax if you live in a property owned by an offshore company if you are either a director ( either in name or in effect ) or own it . Tax charged is particularly onerous and is based on the cost of the house ( if over Pounds 75,000 ) and the rate of interest at the time . Many tax experts believe the Revenue is wrong to levy this charge ; but while the threat is there it should , where possible , be avoided . This usually can be achieved by not being a director of the company and transferring your shares in the company to an offshore trust . Again , care must be taken over the trust to which you transfer your shares . If you use an existing trust containing accumulated income , you might find yourself being taxed on that income because of the benefit to you of the UK accommodation . If you want to let the house , the rental income will be taxable since it arises in the UK . This can be avoided by taking out a loan from a UK bank ( or an offshore branch of a UK bank - but not a building society ) to buy the property . The interest can then be set off against the rent and the money which , otherwise , you would have used to buy the property can be deposited offshore , generating an income which will be tax-free because it is outside the UK . There are many ways of avoiding tax , even on UK-situated assets , if you are not domiciled in Britain . But make certain you are not - otherwise you could face a larger tax bill than if you had done nothing at all . Caroline Garnham is a tax and trusts specialist at City solicitor Simmons & Simmons .