NORTH KOREA yesterday raised fears of an international confrontation over its suspected nuclear weapons programme by declaring that it was withdrawing from the nuclear non-proliferation treaty . The decision caused consternation among its Asian neighbours and in the West . North Korea would be the first country to scrap membership of the treaty , which seeks to limit the spread of nuclear technology . Mr Warren Christopher , the US secretary of state , threatened North Korea yesterday with possible international sanctions . Asked if the US would push for United Nations sanctions against North Korea , he said : 'Certainly the North Korean situation is a serious one today and if they continue on the path that they are on I think that that will have to be considered . ' Japan , Germany and Britain also urged Pyongyang to reconsider the move , which Mr Kiichi Miyazawa , the Japanese prime minister , described as 'really dismaying ' . Ms Madeleine Albright , US ambassador to the United Nations , said : 'We call upon North Korea to withdraw its declaration immediately . ' The decision would halt inspections by the International Atomic Energy Agency , which has carried out six inspections of North Korean facilities since Pyongyang permitted them last year . The Vienna-based body said it was a 'grave step ' and began preparations for an emergency board session next week to discuss a response . The IAEA had given a deadline of March 25 for the government of Mr Kim Il-sung , a communist dictator , to permit inspections of two storage buildings at Yongbyon , North Korea 's nuclear complex . It suspects the sites are being used to store nuclear waste for re-processing of plutonium . However , Pyongyang responded that this was not possible at present because of the annual US/South Korean 'Team Spirit ' military exercises , now under way . This week it placed the country on a 'semi-war ' footing in response to the exercise , which was suspended last year in a goodwill gesture after the two Koreas signed a non-nuclear pact . North Korea insists that the two sites are non-nuclear military installations of no concern to IAEA inspectors . In Seoul , where the cabinet met in emergency session , the South Korean foreign ministry said : 'The North 's professed reasons for pulling out of the treaty convince no one . This only heightens the suspicion that it is developing nuclear arms . ' The move threatened to undo recent progress in developing inter-Korean relations . Expiry of the IAEA March 25 deadline could see the issue being transferred to the UN Security Council , which could impose sanctions for non-compliance . China , a permanent member of the Security Council and one of North Korea's few remaining allies , issued a mild rebuke to North Korea . Behind its careful diplomatic phrasing , Beijing has had increasingly strained relations with Pyongyang and is likely to be exasperated by its behaviour .