FIFTY per cent of all calls made are for one-way communication only , but they often interrupt work which is more important than the call itself . So says Nigel Harte , business manager for voice products at Mercury Communications . Irritation at these interruptions is helping to increase the take up of answering machines , voice messaging and voice processing . The latest models of answering machine come complete with cordless phone , and some provide an electronic handshake between base station and handset for extra security . Cordless answering machines are expensive . In the UK , Dixons , the high-street electrical retailer , sells two models : one from South Western Bell for Pounds 149.99 and one from Panasonic for Pounds 179.99 . This compares with Pounds 29.99 for its cheapest non-cordless machine from Betacom . On standard answering machines , popular features include automatic dating and timing of messages ( by a computer-generated voice ) , the ability to switch the machine on remotely , and 'toll saver ' , available on Panasonic's Pounds 59.99 Easa-Phone and some others . If the Easa-Phone does not pick up the call on the fourth ring , the owner should hang up because there are no messages . Backlash against voice messaging : For the corporate environment , voice messaging systems offer many more features than answering machines . But all too often they are implemented using the answering machine as a model . In the US , this has led to something of a backlash against voice messaging . For example , the chief executive of First Union Corporation , made news when he sent a memo banning his company 's voice messaging system after his call to a senior manager was greeted with a recorded message . His memo won applause from employees who also hated the system . Since then , the voice messaging industry has taken steps to make sure the systems are used more effectively . In July 1992 , leading voice messaging manufacturers and service providers ( including AT & T , British Telecom Mobile , Octel Communications Corporation and VMX Inc. ) formed the Voice Messaging Educational Committee , ( VMEC ) ; and this year the committee has published a US market survey Voice Messaging : a vital link in Business Communications and a booklet on voice mail etiquette . At their simplest , voice mail systems allow callers to leave a message if the person they want to talk to is not available . By dialing the appropriate voice mailbox number ( and a code ) , users can play messages back , or forward them to another mailbox . But if a voice messaging system is poorly implemented , the customer may simply get passed from voice mailbox to voice mailbox , or from menu of options to menu of options . This frustrating state is known as 'voice mail jail ' because the caller feels trapped in the system . The etiquette guide suggests : 'Tell callers how they can easily reach someone 'live ' if their call is urgent . ' In fact , the current trend in the US is to use the systems to augment the work of humans , rather than as an excuse for firing the receptionist . There are two main types of voice messaging system : public services ( sometimes linked to a special voice mail phone number ) offered by telecoms carriers such as British Telecom and Mercury ; and premises-based systems , where a company buys voice messaging equipment for use with the in-house phone system . Researchers BIS Mackintosh say there will be 1.4m public voice mail users in Europe on fixed and mobile systems by the end of the year , rising to 5.4m in 1997 . Meanwhile , premises-based systems have grown 70 per cent a year between 1991 and 1993 . In the UK , the profile of public voice messaging is increasing , largely because cellular phone operators , such as Cellnet , Vodafone and One-2-One ( from Mercury ) , provide voice mailboxes linked to users ' mobile phones . Visual voice mailboxes : As well as spreading to mobile phone users , 'voice messaging technologies are moving to the desktop and becoming integrated with other forms of communication , such as electronic mail and fax , ' according to Elaine Cascio , a consultant at US voice systems consultancy Vanguard . For example , products are emerging which allow a list of voice messages to be viewed on a personal computer . Particular messages can then be selected and played back on the PC ( if it has voice capabilities ) or through the phone . Suppliers which have ( or are developing ) integrated products for the desktop include VMX , Octel Communications , C3 , Applied Technology , Active Voice and Converse . Apart from voice messaging , there are two other types of voice system : audiotex ( used for 0898 recorded information , such as racing results ) and voice processing ( or interactive voice response ) . Voice processing is the type of technology used in telephone-based home banking systems . It might , for example , prompt the user to 'press 'one ' to order a cheque book , press 'two ' for your bank balance . ' In essence , these systems link a voice interface to a computer database . They allow customers to input and retrieve information using a touch-tone phone . The technology is often used in financial applications . In the US , it is also used extensively to order goods publicised on the QVC home shopping channel . In fact , QVC 's system , Tootie , has done a lot to expose consumers to voice response . Interest is growing in Europe too . Cascio says US voice response suppliers are experiencing 57 per cent growth in Europe , with much of this growth coming from pc-based or client-server systems . Integration with fax : According to Robin Scurlock , head of BIS Mackintosh's messaging programme , one of the main drivers in the voice systems market is integration with fax . For example , Octel Communications sells a fax store- and-forward product in the US which enables a caller to a voice mailbox to leave a voice message as well as transmit a fax into the mailbox ( where it is stored on disk ) . The voice message can be collected in the usual way and the fax can be routed to a nearby fax machine by using the phone handset to give details of the fax number to the mailbox . Integration is also evident in fax-on-demand products which enable users to phone a supplier , use touch tone prompts to indicate which product/service they are interested in , and then key in their fax number to get the details faxed to them . Companies using fax-on-demand in the UK include Compaq and Advanstar , organisers of the recent 'Voice '93 ' show held in London . And in the US , there are many bureaux that use fax-on-demand technology to send out companies ' brochures , charging on a monthly or per item basis . Fax-on-demand could be the ideal form of one-way communication . No-one gets interrupted and the fax starts to be sent before the caller puts down the phone . Copies of 'Making the most of voice mail , ' a guide to voice mail etiquette , are available from any VMEC member-company or from Vanguard Communications on ( US ) : 201 605 8000 .