EMPLOYEES who refuse to accept counselling for drink problems are increasingly likely to face the sack , the charity Alcohol Concern said yesterday when it released results of a survey on alcohol in the workplace . Alcohol abuse costs UK industry at least Pounds 2bn a year , according to the Centre for Health Economics at the University of York . This figure takes into account the cost of sickness absence , unemployment and premature death , but excludes other social and National Health Service costs . More than 40 per cent of the organisations questioned by Alcohol Concern said there was a ban on drinking during company time , while nearly 35 per cent said there was a prohibition on alcohol on their premises . At nearly half of the companies with bans , restrictions also applied to senior management , the survey found . British Rail , London Underground and London Buses all rigidly apply drinking bans , as do several other bodies with heavy responsibility for public safety . More commonly , companies either expect employees to use their own judgment about moderating their drinking , or have restrictions which apply to business premises only . For example Unilever accepts the normal use of alcohol for 'social purposes ' and has alcohol on sale at its staff restaurants and the social club at its London headquarters where 1,200 employees are based . British Telecommunications , with its workforce of more than 160,000 , does not allow alcohol on company premises , apart from exceptional circumstances and then a member of top management has to give written permission . The survey found that problem drinkers were disciplined in more than 70 per cent of organisations if they refused help but nearly all said they kept jobs open for employees during treatment . More than 40 per cent had sacked workers for drunkeness or breaching company rules on alcohol . Nationwide building society , which has nearly 14,000 workers , is an example of one organisation where employees could face the sack if they refuse counselling . There is no overall alcohol ban but a written policy states that if staff fail to accept help , and if work performance and the society's public image are affected , 'the society will have no recourse other than to instigate disciplinary action ' . Only a small proportion of organisations screen employees , the survey found . Just 6 per cent said they screened the whole workforce , while 5 per cent were selective . Of those that did so , 18 per cent screened on a random basis . The survey sample was drawn from organisations that had been in contact with the charity 's workplace advisory service or were known to have policies on alcohol . More than 80 bodies took part , 80 per cent of them with more than 1,000 employees .