Conventional with-profit endowment pay-outs are made up of the following : The Sum Assured When you start paying premiums , a minimum sum is guaranteed to you either when you die ( these policies started out as life insurance vehicles ) or when the policy matures . This sum will usually be set at a level slightly less than the value of all the premiums paid in by the end of the policy . Reversionary Bonuses These bonuses , sometimes called annual bonuses , are added to the sum assured each year , and once declared can not be taken away , provided the policy continues to maturity . Such bonuses need to be backed by low-risk , fixed-interest investments for the guarantees to be made . Some offices have multiple reversionary bonus structures , with bonuses added on both to the sum assured and to the accrued total of reversionary bonuses . Terminal Bonuses When the policy has matured , a terminal bonus may be added . This will be a proportion of the accrued reversionary bonuses on the sum assured , and allows actuaries to take the latest market conditions into account . These bonuses add an element of volatility , as they are not guaranteed from one year to the next , so they will not , as a rule , appear on an annual bonus statement . Unitised With-Profits In the past decade , insurers have introduced a new form of with-profits contract in which investors buy units with each premium . The value of the units increases steadily in line with bonuses announced at the start of the year . This avoids the need to make reserves for the entire sum assured from the word go , which makes life easier for the office and helps with administration - it is much easier to vary premiums under this form of contract . Surrender Values Most policyholders do not keep their policy until it matures . If so , unless they sell it , they will receive only a surrender value , which is worked out using a different set of calculations from the bonuses which make up the pay-outs on a conventional policy . Investment returns will have an effect , but you will not necessarily receive all the accrued reversionary bonuses if you surrender a policy early .