Intrigued by glowing accounts of rich information resources and lured by the promise of a free international electronic mail service , computer users are signing up in droves to services that offer access to the Internet , a global web of computer networks . Already , the Internet links thousands of computers and an estimated 15m computer users . One million new subscribers a month are said to be hooking up their computers to 'the Net ' . Public awareness of the Internet has been raised in part by the Clinton administration 's promotion of the 'national information infrastructure ' as a development that will bring broad economic and social benefits to all Americans . The Internet is the precursor of the high-speed information superhighway system . It provides free access to thousands of computer databases , the opportunity to engage in a myriad of on-line debates or special interest group discussions and the ability to exchange electronic messages with other users almost anywhere in the world at little or no cost . From its genesis in a 1969 US Defence Department project to provide computer links between researchers at US universities and national laboratories , the Internet has grown into a vast web of public and private computer networks , about half of which are in the US . Although it lacks the speed and bandwidth of future information superhighways , the Internet demonstrates the potential value of data communications , as well as some of the challenges that lie ahead on the information superhighways . By creating digital links to distant information resources , for example , the Internet is beginning to eliminate the constraints that geography places on access to education , jobs and services . ' ( Students ) can now access Nasa , leave messages for the astronauts , browse around in libraries larger than they will ever be able to visit . . . read world and national news that appears in newspapers that are not available in their small towns . . . change the way they feel about the size of their world , ' a teacher from a small Texas school district writes in 'The National Information Infrastructure : Agenda for Action ' , a report by Clinton's Information Infrastructure Task Force ( IITF ) . Businesses are taking advantage of the vast libraries of research reports available on the Internet . Small companies that can not afford private computer networks can use the Internet to link distant sites . Software developers and insurance companies are using the Internet to shift labour-intensive programming and data processing jobs to low-cost regions of the world . The growing use of the Internet also points to an urgent need for higher capacity information highways . Already , there are data traffic jams on the Internet as millions of new users explore its resources . New high-speed data channels are essential if the whole system is not to become gridlocked . Widening the 'roads ' of the Internet may not , however , be sufficient to provide broad public access to information resources . Indeed , the history of the Internet would suggest that it may encourage even more traffic . The establishment in the 1980s of the National Science Foundation Network , which provided a high-speed 'backbone ' for the Internet , spurred a vast increase in its use . The entire information infrastructure - 'bridges ' linking different networks and 'on and off ramps ' providing access to individual computers - will have to be upgraded if there is to be 'universal access ' to information resources as the Clinton administration is insisting . The shortcomings of the Internet also raise questions about the design of information superhighways . Despite its rising popularity , the Internet can be fully exploited only by people with a significant degree of computer expertise . To be accessible to a broader spectrum of society , information superhighways will have to be far easier to use . This will require the development of interface software that hides the complexity of the network from its users . The lack of any central control over the Internet has enabled it to grow rapidly as thousands of regional and local area computer networks have plugged in . However , the flexibility of the Internet also makes it far more complex . There is , for example , no catalogue of resources on the Internet . The Internet is therefore difficult to use unless you know exactly what you are looking for and where to find it . Similarly , the Internet lacks the equivalent of a telephone directory . To send messages to another Internet user you have to know their Internet address , but there is nowhere to look it up . Data security is another weakness . As numerous security violations have shown , however , ensuring data privacy may prove difficult . The thorny question of the rights of law enforcement officials to 'snoop ' on the data highway has also to be addressed . Access to vast amounts of information is not the whole answer . The power to discover the right information quickly and easily , to separate 'nice to know ' from 'need to know ' information is essential if information superhighway users do not drown in electronic 'junk info ' . Perhaps the most critical issues raised by the Internet relate to intellectual property rights . On the Internet , anybody can copy any material -whether it be a newspaper article or a graduate thesis - without charge . Essentially , this means an individual who posts information on the Internet forfeits rights of ownership . The IITF is currently evaluating the need for a system that enables information providers to collect royalties for copyrighted products delivered or made available through information superhighways . The Clinton administration has acknowledged that unlike the Internet , the information superhighways of the future will be built and controlled by the private sector . However , the government will have a critical role to play in determining that all Americans have 'universal service at affordable prices' and in writing the 'rules of the road ' . Commercially owned , government-regulated , high-speed information networks will be capable of delivering a myriad of services , ranging from interactive television and on-line shopping to video-conferencing and information services akin to those of the Internet . Ironically , however , while newcomers to 'telecomputing ' may welcome such developments , veteran Internet navigators fear commercialisation and regulation will doom the free-wheeling spirit that has enabled the Internet to thrive . Published by Addison Wesley . A pocket-sized guide with plenty of Internet lore . The Internet Guide for New Users . By Daniel P Dern . Published by McGraw-Hill . A comprehensive reference book . Connecting to the Internet . By Susan Estrada . Published by O'Reilly & Associates . Practical information on how to get hooked up to the Internet . Zen and the Art of the Internet : A Beginner 's Guide to the Internet . By Brendan Kehoe . Published by Prentice-Hall . Short and sweet , everything you need to know to get started . The Whole Internet User 's Guide and Catalog by Ed Krol . Published by O'Reilly & Associates . This is the Internet Bible . It is encyclopedic and clear .