Here is a novel idea for public sector railway managers . Tired of complaints about unreliable trains ? Easy : take Pounds 30m of taxpayers ' money , give it to an independent contractor and leave the private sector to put things right . That , at least , seems to be the thrust of the unprecedented deal struck by London 's Docklands Light Railway last week in appointing Brown & Root , the US engineering group , as its prime contractor . Brown & Root will not take over the day-to-day running of the railway . But over the next three years it will manage the remaining stages of an Pounds 800m expansion and improvement programme . At the end of that time it must deliver a railway that works . Its Pounds 30m fee is geared directly to results . The significance of the deal is that it is wholly uncharacteristic of the railway industry . Railwaymen fervently oppose the notion that anyone should come between them and their trains . They insist on controlling every aspect of building and running the system , with the private sector 's role limited to that of sub-contractor and supplier . But the Docklands Light Railway 's managers are not railwaymen . Since November 1991 , they have been a team of defence procurement experts drafted in from the Ministry of Defence . Their chairman , Sir Peter Levene , is former head of defence procurement at the MoD . He also heads the prime minister's efficiency unit . When Sir Peter and his team arrived , the Docklands Light Railway was in such disarray that the government had seized control of it from London Transport and passed it to the London Docklands Development Corporation . Its poor performance can be partly blamed on the fact that it was built on a shoestring budget of Pounds 77m at a time when the government 's ambitions for Docklands were modest . When Olympia & York , the Canadian property developer , proposed transforming Canary Wharf into London 's third commercial centre , the toy-town railway had to be improved . When the government responded by authorising an Pounds 800m expansion and upgrading of the line , the immediate effect was to make matters worse . Already incapable of meeting the demands being made on it , the system had to cope with being rebuilt while trains were still running . Consequently , services deteriorated to the point of chaos . But was there more to its poor performance than this ? Today , the railway is running 98 per cent of scheduled train mileage compared with a low of 67 per cent before the management changeover . What caused such a drastic turnround ? Sir Peter says some simple manAgement actions produced quick results . For example , his team discovered that the computer controlling the train operations was overloaded . That was rectified through the seemingly obvious action of trimming the train service . Another step was getting to grips with the contractors responsible for supplying track , trains and so on . 'Some of contractors were performing extremely badly , ' says Sir Peter . 'The DLR people said : 'We 've written to them and asked them to do better , but they 're just not doing that . ' I said : 'Well , let 's stop paying them . ' They said : 'You ca n't do that - they 'll sue . ' So I said : 'Let them ' . ' The result ? 'Some sharp words were exchanged , but the performance of those contractors changed overnight . ' To be fair to London Transport , it could be argued that the improvements in the railway 's performance might have happened without the change in management . Conceivably , Sir Peter 's team simply enjoyed the fruits of action initiated by the previous incumbents . London Transport , however , acknowledges Sir Peter and his colleagues wrought changes . One advantage they enjoyed was the freedom to act without constant reference to headquarters . Another was their reputation for tough dealing with contractors such as GEC while at the defence ministry . Indeed , that was one of the main reasons for bringing them in . It was a logical extension of this last point that led to the decision to appoint a prime contractor . The team is now applying the techniques of defence contracting to railway projects , says Sir Peter . If the defence ministry wants to order a new fighter aircraft , it does not deal with dozens of contractors making all the sub-systems . It defines the performance it wants , signs a contract for delivery with a single company such as British Aerospace and leaves it to the prime contractor to deliver the aircraft it wants . As in the defence industry , so in transport . Sir Peter 's team will no longer deal with dozen contractors involved in the extension of the railway to Beckton , the installation of a new control system and the supply of new trains . That - and the integration of these parts into a smoothly-running whole - will be Brown & Root 's job . Is this the way of the future for other railway projects ? Possibly . One worrying factor , however , must be cost . Theoretically , a private-sector contractor motivated by a performance-related fee will do a better job at project management than a flabby public-sector body . But the Docklands Light Railway only brings in Pounds 3m a year in ticket sales . Seen in that light , Pounds 30m seems an awful lot to pay . The cynical view might be that the government is prepared to nod the deal through , hoping it will better prepare the railway for its planned privatisation . So it might ; but that , says Sir Peter , is not the point . 'The question is whether it represents good value for money . Everyone 's been satisfied that 's the case , and now we are going ahead . I think we would be criticised for spoiling the ship for a ha ' p'orth of tar if , having spent Pounds 800m on the railway , we had not spent another Pounds 30m in getting it to work . '