CHINA WILL soon embark on a drive to attract much-needed foreign involvement in its flagging minerals development sector , following a comprehensive review of its resources policy . Mr Zeng Shaojin , director of exploration for the Ministry of Geology and Mineral Resources , said in an interview that China was accelerating attempts to involve foreign companies in both the exploration and development of its minerals under what he described as its Prospecting Treasure Plan . This aimed at providing China with the additional mineral resources needed to support its booming economy , which is expected to grow at between 8 and 9 per cent annually for the rest of this decade . It registered growth last year of 12.8 per cent . Mr Zeng said China planned to invite foreign miners to Beijing in May to discuss about 30 projects that might be available . United Nations bodies would help to organise the conference . The Chinese official admitted that the response of foreign mining companies to earlier overtures by China had been disappointing . He hoped that new regulations to be released later this year would be more appealing . In Beijing , the representative of a foreign mining conglomerate described existing mining regulations - these date from 1986 - as 'strongly nationalistic ' and a disincentive to investment . What was needed , he said , was both a change in the regulations to link development with exploration under favourable terms and , perhaps more importantly , a shift in philosophy . Mr Zeng seemed to indicate the latter was possible when he declared that China was now anxious to secure foreign assistance because it had neither the funds nor the advanced minerals treatment technology required . China 's mineral resources were rich and diversified , he declared , but were under-developed . Per capita yield of minerals is only half the world's average . The Chinese official indicated that priority minerals included copper ( China imports about half its requirements of copper concentrate , an intermediate material ) , lead , zinc , iron ore , coal , diamonds , rare earths , uranium and possibly gold . While Chinese regulations effectively prevent foreign exploitation of gold reserves at present , Mr Zeng indicated that this might change if 'certain gold deposits need high technology and funds for development . ' He conceded that China had in the past two decades devoted too big a proportion of its minerals exploration and development budget to the search for gold . This had absorbed about 60 per cent of all funds devoted to solid minerals exploration . He estimated China 's 'in-ground ' gold reserves at 3,000 tonnes , and these were being added to at the rate of about 10 per cent annually . China mined about 100 tonnes of gold a year . In anticipation , possibly , of a more encouraging environment for foreign mining companies in China there appears to have been a revival of interest . Broken Hill Proprietary of Australia recently signed an agreement to investigate a lead-zinc deposit in Sichuan province . But foreign mining representatives indicated that they would proceed cautiously until they could be sure China had indeed experienced a change of heart and was genuinely open for business in the sensitive minerals area .