HAS RECESSION taken the pressure off central London 's creaking public transport system ? Try asking commuters on the Central Line , London Underground 's main east-west link across the capital . Even at today's reduced passenger levels , peak-hour loadings are 45 per cent above the levels for which the line was designed . Yet the Treasury is now questioning the need for the planned Pounds 2bn CrossRail scheme , a new east-west rail line due to open around the turn of the century . CrossRail would bring big benefits to central London . By providing a link between British Rail 's Liverpool Street and Paddington stations , it would enable suburban trains to run straight through central London stopping at stations in the West End and the City on the way . Many commuters could then reach their destinations without changing to the Underground , so saving time and reducing pressure on the Central Line . Questioning such a project looks perverse at a time when London Underground is poised to embark on a Pounds 1.8bn extension of the Jubilee Line to the Docklands development area . Like CrossRail , the Jubilee Line extension was approved before recession set in . At the time , cost/benefit analyses of the two projects yielded similar results . Since then , the outlook for employment growth in Docklands ( and hence , demand for transport ) has deteriorated much more than it has in central London . Yet it is the financially stronger case for CrossRail that has now come under Treasury scrutiny . There is an argument for pressing ahead with the Jubilee Line extension for the regenerative effect it would have on Docklands , but certainly not if it is at the expense of providing central London with an acceptable transport system . While money is being ploughed into transport for Docklands - Pounds 1.8bn for the Jubilee Line , Pounds 1.65bn for roads and Pounds 800m for an expansion of the Docklands Light Railway - central London has seen the Pounds 750m-a-year capital spending budget for its transport system cut by a third , and CrossRail is now the only significant transport project on the horizon . Docklands is not the only part of London that needs good transport : central London needs it , too . If the government can not see this , it can only be because it regards one of the capital 's withered extremities as more important than its overall economic health .