THE LANGUAGE OF THE GENES by Steve Jones HarperCollins Pounds 16.99 , 251 pages IF ALL the people in the world were boiled down into a soup , Steve Jones tells us , they would just about fill Lake Windermere . The interesting thing is that the genetic diversity discernible in such a soup would be very small : all humans are closely related because their evolution is such a recent event . Seen through the lens of genetic science , humankind 's nature and history appear fascinating , extraordinary , and sometimes terrifying . The lens is focused for us by Steve Jones , Professor of Genetics at University College London . He demonstrated his remarkable gifts as a communicator in the Reith Lectures of 1991 , from which this book stems . In literate and highly readable style he explains genetics and uses it to take us on a tour of human existence . One of Jones 's aims is to rescue genetics from its doubtful past , when Nazis and others sought to pervert it into eugenics . A second aim is to suggest what can and can not be expected from genetics , especially in its medical applications . But his chief aim is to demonstrate genetics in action as an instrument of self-knowledge , revealing 'an extraordinary picture of what we are , what we were , and what we may become . ' Jones works at University College 's Galton Laboratory , named after the eccentric polymath Francis Galton , whose interests were amazingly diverse : they included an attempt to measure the size of African women 's buttocks from a distance by means of ' a sextant and the principles of surveying ' . Galton was the first theorist of human eugenics , whose aim , he announced , was 'to check the birth rate of the Unfit and to improve the race by furthering the productivity of the fit . ' His ideas , together with those of Charles Darwin , had a powerful effect on the 19th and 20th centuries , with appalling consequences as we too well know . But the science of genetics , Jones says , despite having the shadow of eugenics still lying across it , has at last come of age . Genetics is the investigation of how individuals inherit physical and behavioural traits from their ancestors . Central to this enquiry is the concept of the gene , the basic unit of heredity . A gene is a packet of chemical information consisting of DNA . The collection of all such packets in an individual is called his 'genome ' ; the data it contains is equivalent in amount to a billion-page telephone directory . Geneticists are close to being able to 'read ' the entire genome , and when they can they will not only know which ancestors gave us our coloration , height and other characteristics , but they will be able to tell us something of our fate also ( for example , what diseases we are prone to suffer ) . Jones shows that genetics has already taught us much . After explaining the nature and functioning of genes , and how our genetic past lingers in our present , he takes us through an unfolding series of topics , a chapter on each . They include human evolutionary history ; the development of language , agriculture and urbanisation ; the effects of disease ; the question of race ; the promise and danger of genetic engineering ; and the genetic prospects for humanity 's future . Each is utterly absorbing . Take the problem of disease , the 'unremitting enemy ' as Jones calls it . It is one of the most potent agents for genetic change . Plagues come - the Black Death , AIDS - and go when immunity develops ; but sometimes at a high cost , as with sickle-cell anaemia , prevalent among Africans whose red blood cells mutated to resist malaria . Some diseases had to wait until populations grew sufficiently large ; measles , for example , needs a base of half a million people to survive . New strains of some diseases periodically migrate to humans from animals ; novel strains of Asiatic flu start with ducks on Chinese farms and reach people via pigs every few years . One surprising lesson Jones teaches is that the evolution of agriculture seems to have been , at best , a mixed blessing . Before it happened people had a much more diverse diet and lived in healthier places . With agriculture came private property and taxes . Hunter-gatherers have it easier than farmers and urbanites ; bushmen spend only 15 hours a week getting sustenance for their families , much less than half the time spent by agricultural and industrial workers . God 's remark to Adam about eating his bread in the sweat of his brow seems prescient . Jones performs a useful service in demolishing myths about race . Humans share 98 per cent of their genes with their closest ape relatives . But all humans are genetically closer to one another than are , for example , orangutans living on neighbouring islands . Human differences in eye shape , hair type and skin pigment are strictly superficial . ' I have always felt a certain compassion , ' Jones drily remarks , 'for those whose ability to despise their fellow men is limited by the colour of their victim 's skin . ' But it is humanity 's newly-acquired control over its genetic destiny which makes us mistrust the future . Scientists dislike prognostication , but Jones bravely asks : how will our genetic destiny be affected by our increased knowledge , our younger reproductive ages , our dramatically increased 'outbreeding ' or population mixing , our ageing populations , our pollution problems , and much besides ? As you would expect , his answers are both fascinating and startling .