Insurance companies were urged yesterday not to require people to disclose the results of genetic tests until the UK has an agreed national policy on the use of genetic information . But the Association of British Insurers said the proposed moratorium was unnecessary because companies did not use genetic screening for life insurance . Launching Britain 's first in-depth report on the ethics of genetic screening , the Nuffield Council on Bioethics called on the government , health professionals , employers and insurers to agree measures to protect people 'against the potentially adverse effects of screening , including the misuse of confidential information , the risk of social stigma and the possibilities of eugenic abuse in the future ' . Action is urgent , the report says , because medical researchers are rapidly developing simple genetic tests for inherited diseases ranging from cystic fibrosis to some forms of cancer . 'It will soon be possible to screen for hundreds of diseases , ' said Dr Peter Harper , professor of medical genetics at the University of Wales , Cardiff , and a member of the Nuffield committee - a group of scientists , doctors , legal and ethical specialists . Insurers already have a policy not to require applicants for life or health policies to undergo special genetic tests . But the council wants companies to go further and 'accept a temporary moratorium ' on asking people to disclose existing genetic information . Under the present policy , genetic test results have to be declared . Insurers say that in practice they do not make use of genetic information acquired in screening programmes . And they are coming to appreciate that genetic tests need to be treated differently from other medical information . 'The industry is still living down the myth that even a negative HIV test makes it more difficult to obtain life insurance , ' said Dr Mary Reynolds , medical adviser to Canada Life Assurance . 'Life insurance should never be a deterrent to genetic testing . ' Genetic Screening : Ethical Issues . Nuffield Foundation , 28 Bedford Sq , WC1B 3EG . Pounds 6 .