Whitbread , the brewing and retail group , is to make a series of senior management changes in its public house operations following the retirement next February of Len Oliver , managing director of Whitbread Pub Partnerships for the past three years . Oliver was previously managing director of Thresher and has been with the company for 19 years . Oliver , 53 , who joined Whitbread in 1976 after 20 years with J Lyons , was largely responsible for the reorganisation of Whitbread 's leased pub estate to meet the requirements of government legislation . That restructuring followed on the heels of a report from the Monopolies and Mergers Commission , an inquiry into the brewing industry . Oliver is to be succeeded by Bill Shannon , 44 , who is at present managing director of the group 's Beefeater restaurants and pubs , and former managing director of Thresher , the off-licence chain . Shannon , right , will join the group 's executive committee on December 1 . Simon Wood , commercial director of Whitbread Inns , the managed pub estate , will take over as managing director of Beefeater . Wood joined Whitbread Inns in 1990 from Chef & Brewer , where he had been managing director . Stewart Miller , 40 , operations director of Beefeater will become sales and marketing director of Whitbread Inns . He will be replaced by Ian Webster , 39 , currently director and general manager of Sherwood Inns in Sheffield , where he is responsible for more than 280 managed pubs . David Livingstone , 48 , operations director of Whitbread Inns , takes up a new post of business development director , and will concentrate on the division 's expansion plans . All the management changes are due to be in place by the start of Whitbread 's financial year on March 1 1994 . Peter Jarvis , chief executive , said : 'Each of the new appointments is designed to bring fresh impetus to the growth plans of the operating companies concerned . We are fortunate in having management strength in depth to make such a series of changes from within the company 's own resources . '