CARIBBEAN rum producers have asked the European Union to increase the quota for rum they can ship duty free , and then to abolish the quota to end a shortage of the product in Europe . A senior official of the European Commission said the rum quota would be increased by previously agreed levels next year , and the possibility of abolishing the quota would be studied . The producers say , they need more immediate action to end what they say is the disruption of the market . The rum producers , part of the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) group of countries , have criticised the EU for being slow to honour legal commitments to react by increasing the access for rum to meet the growing demand . They say this is written into the Lome Convention , a trade and aid treaty between the EU and the ACP . The current quota stands at 220,000 hectolitres a year , following a 20,000 hectolitres increase . 'To the extent that the consumption of rum increases significantly in the ( Union ) , the ( Union ) undertakes to carry out a new examination of the annual rate of increase fixed by this protocol , ' says the convention . Officials from the rum producing countries say that what is seen by many as the Commission 's foot-dragging is the result of pressure from France which wants to protect its domestic rum industry in Martinique and Guadeloupe , its two Caribbean departments . 'Rum is the only industrial product covered by the Lome Convention which is subject to quotas , ' says Mr Yesu Persaud , chairman of the Caribbean Association of Industry and Commerce . 'Because of the quota system , the Caribbean rum industry is now experiencing serious disruption because the demand for rum in the ( Union ) has been growing rapidly . ' Mr Peter Pooley , director general of the Development Directorate of the European Commission , has assured rum producers that the automatic quota increase of 20,000 hectolitres will be effected next year . 'In February 1994 we will begin work a report on dismantling the rum quota , ' he said . One Caribbean official describes this as 'cold comfort ' to an industry that had a market 'begging for the product but which is being obstructed for reasons known only to themselves ' by the EU . Before the Lome Convention was agreed , rum from what are now the ACP states entered Europe unrestricted . There were no quotas , although the product was subject to duty . With the first Lome agreement , France insisted on a quota for the quantity of rum that could be imported duty free , and this was written into the current agreement . Demand for rum in Europe has been expanding steadily since 1989 when the EU legislated on the definition of rum , establishing that it had to be made from sugar cane . This destroyed a lucrative market for several other spirits which had been marketed in Europe as rum , and also drove counterfeiters out of the market . 'This growth has continued and is now outstripping the quota we have , ' says Mr Patrick Mayers , chairman of the West Indies Rum and Spirit Producers Association . 'The quota was exhausted at the end of the quota year which ended in June , and will soon be for the current year . ' Mr Mayers says many European importers and distributors have told their Caribbean suppliers to ensure that the problems of the last quota year are not repeated , as they would not be able to handle shipments which exceeded the quota . Such imports attract a 'punitive ' duty which makes the product too expensive to be sold , says Mr Mayers . The automatic increase of 20,000 hectolitres which they will get next year is considered by the producers insufficient to resolve the problem . They say that the rate of growth of demand for rum in the EU will soon outstrip the increased quota , and that the situation will become tighter when new members join the Union . The European market brings the Caribbean producers about Dollars 20m ( Pounds 13m ) a year , and these earnings could increase significantly if access were to be improved , says Mr Mayers . Rum producers fear that a continued shortage of the product will lead European consumers to turn to other liquor , leaving rum a difficult task in regaining market share if and when access for the product is increased either through higher quotas or an abolition of the quota .