TWO leading building material suppliers , RMC Group , the ready-mixed concrete company , and Blue Circle , the UK 's largest cement maker , indicated that they would increase prices in the UK in the next few weeks . Both companies reported results for 1992 yesterday , showing sharp falls in UK profits . Each said they expected price rises to be effective , in spite of likely further volume falls . RMC 's shares rose 21p to 629p and Blue Circle's were up 3 1/2 p to 241p . Mr Jim Owen , managing director of RMC , the UK 's leading ready mixed concrete supplier and the largest buyer of cement , said 1992 'was a damned difficult year , particularly in the UK ' . He said the timing of any recovery was uncertain , but took hope from a pick-up in housing activity . He added that price increases 'will be a very important factor in a recovery in UK profits ' . RMC 's UK operating profits have fallen from Pounds 132m in 1989 to Pounds 10.2m in 1992 . RMC is putting up sand and gravel prices by between 6 per cent and 7 per cent on May 1 , and is considering a concrete price rise . Analysts said RMC is such a large customer of Blue Circle that the latter 's price rise would depend on RMC raising its concrete prices . Mr Ian McKenzie , chief executive of Blue Circle Cement , said 'we believe the majority of our customers are ready to support a price increase ' . He said customers will be notified about the size of the increase - likely to average between 2 and 3 1/2 per cent - 'very shortly ' . BCC said UK cement volumes fell 12 per cent in 1992 and prices fell 2 per cent . It expected a further volume decline of about 5 per cent in 1993 . Mr John Cooper , head of RMC 's UK concrete operations , said its volumes fell 8 per cent in 1992 and the business barely broke even . 1993 would be 'tricky ' with further volume falls , but , he added , 'the worst is behind us ' . Both groups have cut capacity in response to falling demand . BCC is in the middle of a Pounds 58m restructuring programme aimed at reducing capacity and cutting costs . RMC said the ready-mix concrete industry had rationalised with many smaller players failing , withdrawing or being taken over . Lex , Page 18 ; Details , Page 20