MIDNIGHT in Manhattan . In a basement club in the heart of America 's most sophisticated metropolis , couples in cowboy hats and boots are strutting to country dances with hick-sounding names like the Texas two-step , honky tonk stomp and boot-scootin ' boogie . A glittering cowboy saddle , plated with mirrored glass , revolves from the ceiling . Other icons of the American west are scattered throughout the hall -painted wagon wheels , cacti , stuffed animal heads - while television sets show black-and-white film of Hollywood cowboy stars riding into Last Chance Gulch . Suddenly , the dancers form in rows for one of the popular new country 'line' dances : a few steps to the left , a few to the right , and then a corkscrewing leg kick . It looks a little like a slow-motion aerobics class performed in western fancy dress . This is Denim & Diamonds , a nightclub which opened recently within tobacco-spitting distance of the Waldorf-Astoria hotel , bringing a national boom in country music and dancing into the centre of culturally sniffy New York City . Country music 's revenue share of US record sales soared from 8.8 per cent in 1990 to 16.5 per cent in 1992 and singer Garth Brooks , the biggest phenomenon to hit country music in decades , was America 's top-selling record artist in any category last year . More than 2,600 radio stations - a quarter of the US total - now feature country music . Boosters in Nashville , Tennessee , the centre of the industry , claim it is the most popular radio format in 57 of America 's top 100 cities , many of them outside country's traditional base in the south and west . Now , Nashville is hoping to conquer the rest of the world . Japan , which watches American fashions closely , already has its first all-country radio station and Country Music Television ( CMT ) , a cable channel showing non-stop country music videos , began transmissions in Britain and other European countries last autumn . Turning Europe on will not be easy , though . In the UK , for example , country has a thoroughly negative image as middle-of-the road music with corny lyrics about irrelevant , rural Americana , performed by rhinestone-encrusted hayseeds with funny names , funny accents and even more risible hairstyles . 'Candidly , I do n't think you can just dump a wheelbarrow full of big cowboy hats and belt buckles in the centre of Europe and start a trend , ' says Roy Wunsch , who heads Sony Music 's Nashville operation . The industry , he suggests , will have to exercise a degree of subtlety as it introduces artists to the continent . Yet Europe 's image of country is seriously out of date . The music has changed much over the past few years , which helps explain why it is enjoying such a boom in the US and why it could , conceivably , appeal to a wider European audience . Nashville has discovered a new generation of young , sexy-looking musicians who are singing songs with broader appeal than in the past and who can be marketed nationally using a powerful new medium : cable television . The Nashville Network TV channel was dismissed as a sure-fire failure by much of the entertainment industry when it started 10 years ago . But it is now one of the most popular US cable outlets , with programmes that cover not just music but other aspects of life dear to the country-loving American : country-style cooking , motor mechanics , bass fishing , drag racing , hunting , trucking and rodeo . Its sister network , Country Music Television , is one of the fastest-growing US networks , pumping out non-stop videos of the latest country hits . Another reason for the music 's success seems to be the sheer weakness and fractured nature of other pop formats . Many Americans find it hard to relate to the rap music of the black ghettoes , the uncompromising neo-punk sounds of grunge rock , or the tired themes of heavy metal . Ageing baby-boomers , who like their music tuneful and none too rebellious , find some of the modern country sounds reassuringly similar to the country-rock and folk rock performed in the late 1960s and early 1970s by groups such as The Band and The Eagles . Around Nashville , enthusiasts like to quote a remark attributed , possibly apocryphally , to the British pop star Elton John : 'Rock ' n ' roll hasn't died , it 's just gone country . ' That is an exaggeration , although rock ' n' roll did itself spring partly from country roots : Elvis Presley began as a country singer and is still claimed as such ( somewhat cheekily ) by the Nashville establishment . Presley 's genius was to fuse white country sounds with the black rhythm and blues of the Mississippi delta . Often called 'white man 's blues , ' country music can trace its origins to the poor small-holders , many from the Scots-English border country , who settled the southern Appalachian mountains in the 18th century , bringing with them a tradition of folk ballads which became entwined with other eclectic musical elements . The music became commercialised in the 1920s when radio stations began springing up across the US , some of them featuring country songs . The most important for the development of the music was Nashville 's station WSM ; its weekly show , the Grand Ole Opry , played a seminal part in developing country artists . The Opry is still going and its folksy , old-fashioned shows have become a much revered institution in Nashville ; but its role as a trend-setter has long since been usurped by radio stations focusing on top country hits and , latterly , by television . After a succession of booms in the 1950s and 1960s , country music became stuck in a rut in the early 1980s and faced plummeting record sales . It was dominated by middle-aged stars with a penchant for elaborate costumes , often dripping with jewellery - 'It costs a lot to make a person look this cheap , ' quipped a sequin-covered Dolly Parton at a recent New York concert - and old-fashioned , high-piled hairstyles . 'The higher the hair , the closer to God , ' ran one Nashville joke . The music they performed was equally full of artifice , relying heavily on massed strings , synthesisers , syrupy vocal choruses and excessive use of the steel guitar , the instrument which gives country a soaring , Hawaiian-style sound . Then , around the middle of the decade , salvation arrived in the form of fresh young singers calling themselves 'new traditionalists . ' They rejected slickness in favour of a much simpler , more traditional sound emphasising fiddles , guitars and a single voice . An important early example was Storms of Life , the 1986 debut album by Randy Travis , whose looks were as four-square and clean-cut as his singing and whose record sold surprisingly well . Nashville scoured the south for similar acts and has ended up with a roster of virile-looking men , known collectively as the 'new country hunks , ' who tend to dress in plain but figure-hugging blue jeans and wear cowboy hats ( hence their other nickname : 'hat acts ' ) . Some of their names , as much as their chiselled profiles , could have been plucked from the pages of romantic fiction : Dwight Yoakum , Clint Black , Billy Ray Cyrus . But the most popular of all is Brooks , a man of rather pudgy , boy-next-door good looks who , more than any country singer since Presley , has managed to achieve what every artist prays for : 'cross-over' status . This is industry jargon for someone who appeals to a much wider audience than traditional country fans , and whose records are hits on the regular pop charts as well as the ones restricted to country music . To 'cross over ' is to earn very big bucks . Brooks is so popular because he sings strongly melodic tunes with original lyrics and delivers the package with great intensity . His musical influences go well beyond the traditional country roster to include James Taylor , the melancholic folk singer popular in the early 1970s , and Elton John . In subject matter , too , Brooks ' songs break new ground for country music which used to focus on a few narrow themes , revolving mainly around the hard times and love life of the macho , white southern male of rural , working-class origins ( known as a redneck or 'good ol ' boy ' ) . In traditional songs , his woman has left him , or fails to reciprocate his passion , and he seeks escape from this tribulation by drinking beer ( six packs ) in a bar ( honky tonk ) ; driving around in a pick-up truck ( the Ford ) ; remembering the salt-of-the-earth goodness of his parents ( Maw ' n ' Paw ) ; praying to God ( the Gewd Lawd ) ; or thanking his lucky stars that he was born in the south ( Dixie ) . Many of Brooks ' songs also deal with these cliches , although he handles them freshly . But he also sings about such delicate contemporary issues as date rape and wife battering ; and , in We Shall Be Free , he makes an appeal for racial , sexual and religious tolerance which contrasts sharply with the south 's reputation for bigotry . Long-time Nashville song-writer Richard Leigh , who wrote the 1977 cross-over hit Do n't It Make My Brown Eyes Blue , says : 'There is an urban discovery of country music going on , so you can not just sing about chickens and pick-up trucks because that is not exactly within the experience of a wide variety of people . We are not an agrarian society any more . ' Yet Nashville 's much-vaunted new openness is still pretty limited . Take what happened to the talented singer k d lang , who had an impeccable background for a country artist . She grew up in the rural prairieland of Canada , then tried to make a name for herself in Nashville . The industry cold-shouldered her , partly because of her lesbianism and partly because , as a vegetarian , she made a television commercial attacking the beef industry - an impolitic move given the strong links between country music and cattle farming . She , in turn , transformed herself from a country artist into a more sophisticated mainstream performer , as have some other male artists . But for every Garth Brooks , there are a dozen or so Nashville singers making records with strongly traditional themes . An example is Joe Diffie , a leading performer of 'cry in your beer ' honky tonk rock ; his latest album includes songs such as I Can Walk the Line , If it Ai n't Too Straight - an appeal for his nagging woman to give him some slack from domestic constraints . Many country songs remain cloyingly sentimental and deeply religious , and there is a sizeable streak of kitsch at the heart of the industry . While country has changed , its new face might still be too parochially middle American for most European tastes . The good ol ' boys may have moved from Mama 's farm to suburbia , but they have taken a lot of down-home sentiments with them . While this baggage gives country its sense of individuality and history , it also circumscribes its development .