Taiwan 's President Lee Teng-hui is putting his prestige and political future on the line by publicly campaigning for candidates of his ruling nationalist party , the Kuomintang ( KMT ) , in city and county elections to be held on Saturday . The election is the first to take place since Mr Lee completed the process of bringing the Taiwan government and the KMT under the control of Taiwan-born leaders this year . The results could affect the stability of his hold on power and the progress of liberalising political and economic reforms . Mr Lee said last week that his campaigning marked the first time in Taiwan 's -or China 's - history 'that the head of state has directly faced the people ' . County and city mayors have wide powers over their districts . They exercise control over local police forces , grant business and development licences and arbitrate environmental or labour disputes . This makes them the focus of intense contention among political and financial interests . Of most relevance to the ruling party is the fact that mayors also oversee the administration of elections . The KMT holds 13 mayorships . The main opposition Democratic Progressive party controls seven cities and counties . There is also one city run by a pro-DPP independent . Further erosion could damage the KMT 's hopes in elections next year for Taiwan provincial governor and for the mayors of the big Taipei and Kaohsiung municipalities . In a blow to the KMT 's fortunes yesterday , a senior member of the party defected to the opposition Chinese New Party , which was formed in August by a group of rebel KMT legislators . Mr Hsu Li-nung , a veteran leader of the ruling party 's conservative wing and a member of its central advisory committee , said he was joining the New Party because he was disgusted with rampant corruption . On the campaign front , Mr Lee 's longer-term aim seems to be his ambition to become Taiwan 's first directly-elected president , says Mr Huang Hui-chen , executive director of the Institute for National Policy Research think-tank . Mr Lee was elected indirectly in 1990 by the National Assembly to a six-year term . There are moves to submit a constitutional amendment to allow direct presidential elections before his term expires . Despite previous denials about running for president , Mr Lee last week left the door open when he told the China Times newspaper : 'It 's not yet time to make a decision . ' 'If Lee wants to continue his reforms , he needs to firm up the KMT 's control at the local level or else his control over the KMT itself may weaken , ' Mr Huang notes . Mr Lee and the opposition DPP were often indirect allies in past confrontations with more conservative mainland-born KMT leaders . The last powerful mainland-born leaders were sidelined by Mr Lee at the 14th KMT Congress in August . This now pits ' a Taiwanese KMT against a Taiwanese DPP , ' says Mr Huang . Mr Lee 's greatest risk on the campaign trail is that he may wear out his welcome among the electorate which has indicated widespread approval of his moves to liberalise Taiwan 's political regime . 'The main result of this campaign will be the disappearance of the Lee Teng-hui love-knot , ' says Mr Chao Shao-kang , convener of the New Party . 'Many voters forgive him for everything as he 's the first Taiwanese president , but his dictatorial ways wo n't be tolerated forever , ' Mr Chao says . Meanwhile the DPP is campaigning primarily on the clean and generally effective performance of its mayors . Like those of the New Party , DPP candidates have also pointed to a series of big cases of corruption or inefficiency , including delays and cost overruns of KMT-run Taipei city's mass transit system .