PRESIDENT Bill Clinton is unlikely to reveal new policies towards the Bosnian crisis before next week , according to the White House . Ms Dee Dee Myers , the presidential press secretary , would neither confirm nor deny speculation that Mr Warren Christopher , the secretary of state , would visit Europe for consultations before the US and its allies announced their next moves . But she drew attention to Mr Christopher 's testimony to Congress on Tuesday in which he had spoken of the importance of ensuring American public support for any decision . This implies that Mr Clinton himself , plus other members of the administration , may try to lay out policy options in speeches and elsewhere in the days ahead . The president himself said after meeting congressional leaders late on Tuesday that 'new questions , some new issues and some interesting arguments' had been discussed , but he dropped no hint as to whether he was leaning in favour of allied air strikes , lifting the arms embargo on Bosnia , continuing the course of sanctions and diplomatic pressure , or in what combination . Gen Merrill McPeak , the US Air Force Chief of Staff told a Senate appropriations sub-committee that bombing Serbian artillery positions in the former Yugoslavia would be completely effective and pose 'virtually no risk' to attacking planes . 'Give us time and we will order ( strikes ) on every one of those artillery positions and put it out of business , ' he said . He said that the relatively scarce and unsophisticated surface-to-air weapons available to the Serbs would make the aerial campaign 'virtually no risk to ourselves ' . Nato chiefs have not excluded the use of air strikes in Bosnia but have warned about serious difficulties and risks involved in such a policy . US military officials confirmed yesterday that General Colin Powell , chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff , had held informal talks with Nato colleagues about options for intervening in the war , including the use of bombers . Field Marshal Sir Richard Vincent , the committee chairman , said there was no indication that Nato military authorities would be asked to draw up plans for air strikes . He reacted angrily to suggestions that he had criticised western political leaders on Tuesday . He reiterated the need for a clear statement of political objectives before any change in strategy .