A VIRTUAL collapse in demand has forced the closure of one of Europe 's two remaining tungsten mines while the other is to cut production and employment by about two-thirds . In 1991 the two mines accounted for about 35 per cent of tungsten production outside the former eastern bloc . The Mittersill mine in Austria , previously one of the western world's biggest producers with an output of about 1,400 tonnes a year , has been put on a 'care and maintenance ' basis this month . Mittersill 's operating company , Wolfram Bergbau , is a subsidiary of Metallgesellschaft of Germany . Meanwhile , employees at the Panasqueira mine in northern Portugal , have been told that unless they agree to drastic cuts it would also have to be put on care and maintenance until tungsten prices improve substantially . Tungsten is a very dense material and has the highest melting point of any metal . Its principal uses are in cemented carbides , alloyed steels , super alloys , electrical and electronic products and armaments . At the Portuguese mine plans have been made to reduce present annual production of 1,200 tonnes of tungsten contained in concentrate - about 16 per cent of western world output of the metal - to 450 tonnes while the workforce would be reduced from 640 to 260 . Minorco , the Luxembourg-quoted investment arm of the Anglo American Corporation of South Africa , which in October , 1990 , paid Pounds 14.9m for 80.55 per cent of the mine 's operating company , has told unions represented at the mine it wants to complete the changes by the end of March . China dominates world tungsten production and has frequently been accused of dumping tungsten on western markets . There are market rumours that Chinese mines are at a standstill because Russia , previously the biggest consumer of the metal and which imported more than 5,000 tonnes a year from China , has stopped buying . The International Tungsten Industry Association estimates that production outside the former eastern bloc dropped from 7,500 tonnes in 1991 to 6,000 tonnes last year because of recession in many industrialised countries and falling armaments production . Before the Portuguese cuts were announced , it was predicting a further fall in output this year to 5,000 tonnes . Mr Michael Maby , secretary-general of the association , said yesterday : 'On paper the market looks in balance but any increase in demand can be supplied by China very cheaply indeed ' .