IT IS 10am , just another busy day at Iseya 's Japanese supermarket . Mrs Sasaki , her basket full of packets of sashimi raw fish , noodles , dried sea-weed , soya sauce , bottles of sake wine and Japanese washing-up liquid , exchanges pleasantries with the other Japanese housewives as she passes up and down the aisles . A typical Tokyo scene ? Not a bit . This is Preston Road , Wembley , in London . Mrs Sasaki and her family are part of a 30,000-strong community of Japanese in London . Most Londoners are unaware of the Japanese in their midst . In a city as large as London , it is easy for them to be almost totally hidden . Once they arrive in London , most Japanese families head for established Japanese areas such as Wimbledon , Hampstead , Golders Green or Ealing . 'These Japanese enclaves , ' says Caroline Javis , who works at the Japan Centre , 'have everything they need . They have their own schools , supermarkets , butchers , hair salons , book shops , restaurants and even video stores . They are so self-sufficient that in some parts of London , such as Finchley , where there are whole streets inhabited by Japanese , they hardly need venture more than a short distance . ' The Red Directory , published by Cross Media for Japanese residents , lists more than 700 Japanese businesses in London , roughly a third of the number of such businesses in Britain . They range from airlines to supermarkets and include commercial organisations , insurance companies , legal services , couriers , language schools , estate agents , restaurants , karaoke bars , nightclubs , sports centres and newspapers . With so many industries and services to serve the Japanese , the incentive to integrate is further diminished . Sonobe , a discreet Japanese nightclub at 118 Piccadilly , is one such service . Here , in the centre of London , is a Japanese retreat . But unless you are Japanese , or you are invited , it is unlikely you would know it existed . Established in the mid-1970s by Gordon Marsham - unusually for a Japanese business , he is an Englishman - Sonobe caters to Japanese businessmen willing to spend Pounds 100 a night or more entertaining Japanese-style . Company salarymen visit restaurants and bars in London as often as they do in Japan . At around 9.30pm , when the organist starts at his electronic keyboard , in come the hostess girls to keep the whisky and conversation flowing . Although 'Mr Gordon , ' as he is affectionately known , and some of the hostesses are English , the rest of the staff are Japanese , including the mama-san ( manageress ) . In the back , rows and rows of Chivas Regal , at Pounds 22 a bottle , testify to another custom . Each is personally labelled . While the husbands are working or soaking up Japanese food and nightlife , their wives are visiting Japanese supermarkets and hairdressers , socialising with other Japanese women , and cooking Japanese food . The children go to Japanese schools , have Japanese friends , read Japanese comics and watch Japanese satellite TV . For some , English flower-arranging and tea at Fortnum and Mason is about as close as they get to British culture . Mrs Hashimoto is the editor of the Eikoku News Digest , a weekly newspaper catering to the Japanese . The reason why the Japanese remain such a hidden community , she explains , has much to do with the fact that the Japanese are extremely homogenous , often suspicious of the outside world , of 'otherness . ' 'It is often a huge cultural shock for the Japanese to move from Japan and live abroad , ' she says . 'Even in Britain they feel the same social and peer pressures as they would back home . ' Ms Totsuka is a Japanese psychiatrist living in London . The vast majority of her patients are Japanese women . 'How can they adjust to life in London ? ' she asks . 'They are not encouraged to learn English , they do n't make English friends , their lives revolve around their children and their husbands . Life in London is a sentence for them . ' There are other reasons why the Japanese in London live secluded lives . Most are posted abroad for up to three to four years . Inevitably , one of the biggest barriers to better integration is language , says Mrs Morishita , director of an English language school for Japanese . 'Although housewives have more time and therefore an incentive to go to English classes , many feel inhibited about learning and practising English for fear of it being interpreted as showing off to their friends - a major social taboo in Japan . ' British employees of Japanese companies have stories to tell which illustrate this separation of the Japanese community . Joanna Carpenter works for a Japanese travel agent in central London . 'The office is distinguished by two separate sets of staff , it seems - the Japanese and the English . Although we all work for the same company , we hardly ever mix . Even at office parties , the Japanese sit at one end of the table and we sit at the other . It is almost as if they are not really in the UK . '