JURASSIC PARK ( PG ) Steven Spielberg BARAKA ( PG ) Ron Fricke CHILDREN OF NATURE Fridrik Thor Fridriksson Here it is and was it worth the wait ? When you tell someone you have seen Jurassic Park , back flies the mach-2 question : 'What 's it like ? ' This never means what it should mean - 'What does it resemble ? ' - but 'Is it good/is it bad/will it scare the screaming daylights out of us ? ' Let us take the question at first value . Jurassic Park is like Jaws meets Westworld . ( Steven Spielberg , its director , made the first and Michael Crichton , its writer , wrote and directed the second ) . It is like a nightmare day out at the Natural History Museum . And it is like a Hollywood story conference where savage , primeval pitches rend the air . 'Let 's have the palaeontologist hero and the two kids climb the electrified fence ] ' 'Let 's have the heroine feel a comforting arm on her shoulder and then discover it 's only an arm ] ' 'Let 's have the velociraptors run amok in the Visitors Centre kitchen ] ' 'Let 's have Lord Attenborough play the park's founder with a limp , a Scottish accent and a cherubic smile . ' ( Result : Sir Richard resembles Ronnie Corbett gone AWOL in an HG Wells novel ) . Yes , but you still want to know : 'What is it like ? ' Well , it is good , it is bad , and occasionally it scares the daylights out of us . What is good is the hi-tech presumption of the film . Crichton 's novel was a spinechiller-satire about an ultimate act of hubris . A theme park packed with prehistoric fauna , recreated through a far-fetched ( but not that far-fetched ) union of DIY and DNA , mutinies against its masters . Drawn to the theme of techno-impudence , Steven Spielberg makes a movie that is all techno-impudence . Jurassic Park spreads its banquet of gewgaws , gizmos and breakthrough graphics before us , condemning previous dinosaur films to cinematic prehistory . Computer imaging and state-of-art modelwork ensure that when Tyrannosaurus Rex growls into frame to terrify Dr Sam Neill and the two children he is escorting on an ill-fated preview tour of the park , the said T. Rex is a glistening , roaring , tail-thrashing mother of all monsters with no hint of stop-motion jerk . In fact no signs anywhere of the old clockwork epilepsy we knew and half-loved in Gorgo and Godzilla . Not in the 'raptors and iguanadons ; nor in the gentle triceratops tended by 'palaeo-botanist ' Laura Dern ; nor in the puff-necked 'spitter ' that disposes of the villainous Dennis ( Wayne Knight ) , a park boffin who runs straight into death while smuggling stolen embryos to a waiting boat . But if the monsters have evolved beyond stop-motion , the human characters are a different story . Stereotypes made to fit a game-plan , they stand about striking prescribed attitudes and between shots make small adjustments of gesture to present a fresh facet of the same cliche . The palaeontologist must spout sandblown wisdom . The Chaos Theory scientist ( Jeff Goldblum with Chaos Theory hair and scat speech-patterns ) must burble about things unravelling . And the lady botanist must rail against sexist notions of female weakness one moment , scream like Fay Wray the next . In Jaws Spielberg painted an entire , convincing New England community behind and around the foreground monster . And in Close Encounters Of The Third Kind he gave a messianic madness to the hero 's love affair with the cosmic-impossible . But in Jurassic Park the characters are prisoners of a theme park just like the dinosaurs . Only their theme park is called Hollywood and their inventor-orchestrator is the box-office . Lowest-denominator thinking means that each character represents a big , bland constituency for audience identification , from the all-purpose egghead sceptic ( Goldblum ) to the all-purpose damsel in distress mildly fuzzed by feminism ( Dern ) . Only the actor saddled with the largest burden of cliches , Lord Attenborough , almost succeeds in throwing them off . Ever since he vanished behind a movie camera , fans of Sir Dickie the actor have been crying for him to come forth again . He is marvellous in Jurassic Park . Hammond , the park's founder , could have been a melodramatic cipher : a science-tampering scoundrel out of Fritz Lang by Dr No . But Attenborough gives him a foolish charm , a sing-song passion , even a wistful pain . ( Listen to the pure emotion he finds in a tinselly speech about his flea-circus past ) . Elsewhere , the flimsiness of the people undoes even the ferocity of the beasts . And Spielberg - the Spielberg of ET rather than Jaws - is not above making the monsters cuddly when there is a pause in the ravening . For cuddlification comes with the territory : all those covetable tie-in models , toys , games , T-shirts , gum-wrappers . . . A Chaos Theory terror movie may be the promise , but in Jurassic Park cosiness is always just around the corner . As a lexicogapher friend pointed out , what you really get when you extract DNA from dinosaurs is the word 'souris . ' Jurassic Park is a mouse with pretensions . But such is the power of hype that no one will notice until - only Dollars 100m to go - it has become the highest-earning film ever made . Baraka is a film based upon the problematical notion that cinematic silence equals importance . Subtitled ' A World Beyond Words , ' Ron Fricke 's film is a 90-minute non-verbal collage of imagery that attempts to show the interconnectedness of life on the planet . Starting with a snow monkey dozing off in a hot spring , Fricke 's film quickly goes cosmic , presenting the viewer with a dizzying array of visual takes of smoldering volcanoes , surging city crowds , traditional religious ceremonies and clouds pouring over Himalayan mountaintops . Occasionally , this method provides memorable sequences , such as the montage comparing assembly line work throughout the world that ends with the truly unsettling sight of live chicks tumbling down a stainless steel shoot on the way to becoming inmates at the egg factory . And when Fricke 's 70mm camera zooms in on small details - an Aboriginal man using a plastic comb to paint his face , for instance - he comes close to making his point . But the film eventually collapses under its own portentousness , particularly during a trip to Auschwitz . At times beautiful and arresting , Baraka is ultimately little more than a stylised exercise in global channel-hopping . One of the few countries Fricke does not visit is Iceland . Given the starkly beautiful landscape of that country on view in Children of Nature , you can not help but feel he has missed something . Fridrik Thor Fridriksson's heartfelt second film details the last days of an elderly widower ( Gisli Halldorsson ) who abandons his farm for Reykjavik , only to have his daughter pack him off to an old folk 's home . There , he meets a childhood sweetheart ( Sigridur Hagalin ) , a proud and beautiful septuagenarian who wants to visit her birthplace on the island 's desolate eastern region before dying . Their romance rekindles and , equipped with a stolen jeep , they set off across Iceland , followed by the police . Writer/director Fridriksson has fashioned a subtle , sometimes moving film about people who will not go gently into the Arctic night . Lovingly photographed and well acted , Children of Nature avoids casting the elderly as cute curmudgeons . However , Fridriksson fails to strike a consistent emotional tone , moving too abruptly from unrelieved gloom to fantastical whimsy . And the film 's subtitles are replete with enough misspellings to keep the eye from fully enjoying those bleakly beautiful Icelandic vistas .