SOUTH KOREAN defence officials said yesterday they had not detected any unusual military activity in North Korea in spite of the country being placed on a 'semi-war ' footing last week . Pyongyang took the step in response to the large US-South Korean Team Spirit military exercise , while also withdrawing from the nuclear non-proliferation treaty . The Seoul officials said current military movements in North Korea were consistent with battle mobilisation measures taken in reaction to previous Team Spirit exercises , which have been held since 1976 . Mr Kwon Young-hae , South Korean defence minister , told the National Assembly that Seoul had consulted Washington on the possibility of some of the US troops taking part in Team Spirit staying in South Korea after the exercise ends tomorrow . But defence officials said if North Korean military activity remained normal , this request was unlikely to be made . The US military command in South Korea said there was no change so far in plans to take the 55,000 US troops mobilised for Team Spirit from the country . The exercise tests US ability to reinforce its 38,000 troops in South Korea in the case of war . North Korea has routinely condemned such exercises as a threat to its security and by putting troops on increased alert . Pyongyang has also used the exercises as a pretext to break off previous negotiations with Seoul about nuclear inspections . The Team Spirit exercise this year coincided with the International Atomic Energy Agency 's demand that North Korea let it inspect two suspected nuclear facilities by March 25 or face possible economic sanctions by the UN Security Council . The decision to place North Korea on a 'semi-war ' footing on March 9 , the day Team Spirit began , was made by Mr Kim Jong-il , son of President Kim Il-sung and his designated successor , according to Naewoe , the South Korean agency that monitors North Korean news . Mr Li Chol , North Korean ambassador at the UN in Geneva , said his country might reverse its decision on withdrawing from the nuclear non-proliferation treaty if the US permanently suspended Team Spirit , according to Japan's Kyodo News Service . He also said the IAEA should 'stop obeying the only superpower ' , meaning the US , and that it should operate in an impartial manner . He suggested that the IAEA had made its demand for a special inspection of the North Korean nuclear facilities on US orders .