SIR Alastair Morton , chairman of Eurotunnel , is to chair the government's private finance working group , established to create a closer partnership between the public and private sectors . Announcing the initiative yesterday at the Confederation of British Industry 's annual conference , Mr Kenneth Clarke , the chancellor , said the government was determined to break new ground in developing public sector projects with private finance . 'Just as privatisation broke new ground , so will private finance . This working group will turn the project into reality , ' he said . Other private sector members of the working group are Mr Howard Davies , CBI director-general ; Mr Pen Kent , associate director of the Bank of England ; Mr Allan Gormly , chief executive of Trafalgar House , Mr Neville Simms , chief executive of Tarmac ; and Ms Sheila Masters , a partner of KPMG Peat Marwick , the accountants . Mr Steve Robson , deputy secretary at the Treasury in charge of private finance projects , will head the Whitehall side of the committee and be joined by civil servants from the departments of Trade and Industry , Transport , Employment and Health . Whitehall officials acknowledge that there is resistance to the project from both the public and private sectors . They argue , however , that just as there were big gains for those who took part in privatisation , so will there be big rewards for companies that take part in the private finance initiative . To that end , the Treasury published a new guide to private finance , Breaking New Ground , which highlights the possible opportunities for companies that decide to take part . Mr Clarke hoped the working group would be able to speed up public sector projects with private finance . Sir Alastair said that since the 'public purse ' was only a fraction of what it had been , it was his aim to look at new ways of financing public sector projects . He planned to identify areas of activity where it might be possible to make immediate progress as well as to encourage potential private sector participants in the initiative . See Lex