ANY lingering suspicion that Ms Janet Reno , the new attorney general , might be a shrinking violet were thoroughly dispelled yesterday morning in her spectacularly pugnacious defence of the government 's actions ending the siege of a religious faction 's compound in Waco last week . Cabinet members normally approach important congressional hearings with a degree of deference . But that element was totally absent in several exchanges between Ms Reno and members of the House judiciary committee , above all with Mr John Conyers , veteran Michigan Democrat . In a typically grandstanding address , he said he thought she should have tendered her resignation because of the Waco debacle , in which over 80 cult members died . He was also not satisfied with her explanations of the deaths of the children in the compound . 'This is a profound disgrace to law enforcement in the United States . ' Ms Reno glared at him from behind her glasses and stuck out her jaw . ' I feel more strongly about it ( the deaths of the children ) than you will ever know , ' she spat out with visible anger . ' I will not walk away from a compound where ( federal ) agents were killed . I will not engage in recriminations . I will look to the future . ' Mr Conyers looked stunned . Ms Reno demanded that he ask more specific questions of her . The congressman blustered . She offered to come to his office for a private talk , a gesture quickly seized on by the committee chairman as a way of dispelling the tension . Nor , in other sharp exchanges , did she seek to shift any of the reponsibility for the bloody Waco denouement on to President Bill Clinton , the FBI , or any one other than David Koresh , the cult leader who died in the conflagration . 'The decision how to proceed was mine , ' she stated . ' I advised the president . . . of my decision to authorise the use of tear gas and he said he would support my decision . ' There was 'no realistic expectation the matter would be resolved peacefully if we did nothing ' .