The US Federal Trade Commission 's inability to come to a decision on whether to pursue anti-trust complaints against Microsoft , the world 's largest software company , has fuelled a long-simmering debate in the computer industry . Is Microsoft 's domination of the software field a model for US international competitiveness , or has it inhibited the ability of rival US companies to compete on a 'level playing field ' ? Not since the early days of the US-Japanese chip trade wars a decade ago , have feelings run so high on the issue of allegedly unfair business practices . The FTC 's failure on Wednesday to reach a conclusion on whether to take action against Microsoft did not close its three-year anti-trust investigation . But it has dampened the hopes of competitors that Microsoft will be forced to change its alleged unfair business practices . 'We are very disappointed , ' said Mr David Bradford , senior vice-president and general counsel of Novell , Microsoft 's largest competitor in the PC market and its most outspoken critic . 'It is unbelievable that the FTC will not act on this case . ' Microsoft 's business practices are reducing competitors ' sales , forcing job cuts and discouraging investment in the software industry , he and other critics charge . Not everyone in the computer industry sees Microsoft as a bully that has carved out market share at the expense of less aggressive , smaller rivals . Some observers believe Microsoft has helped to create business opportunities for a host of smaller software and computer companies in an expanding market , but that these have been bruised in their attempts to compete directly with the software superpower . 'Microsoft is a very good , smart company that does a good job and Americans should be proud that it exists . It really has fostered development , ' said a senior software industry executive . 'There are too many would-be multi-billionaires in the industry who prefer to criticise Bill Gates's Microsoft than to examine their own shortcomings . ' The FTC decided to probe the software industry in June 1990 , apparently prompted by extensive reports about Microsoft 's dominance in the personal computer operating system market . Microsoft is the leading supplier of software for PCs . Its MS-Dos program - which controls the basic functions of a computer - is used on an estimated 95 per cent of all standard PCs ( excluding the Apple Macintosh ) . This has given the company a virtual monopoly in the industry that , some charge , it has abused . Mr Bradford claims Microsoft has constrained competition in the market for PC operating systems through its use of 'per-processor ' licensing policies . Microsoft offers discounts to computer manufacturers which agree to pay licence fees for the use of MS-Dos calculated on the total number of PCs they sell , rather than the number of copies of the program they make . In effect , this prevents PC makers from offering their customers alternative operating systems such as Novell 's DR-Dos , Novell claims . If a customer chose DR-Dos , for example , the PC maker would still have to pay Microsoft's MS-Dos licensing fee because of the 'per processor ' licensing agreement . Microsoft has also been accused of 'technological tying ' , by allegedly introducing features into some of its programs that link their use to other Microsoft products . A further charge is that the company gives its own applications program developers - who develop word processors , spreadsheets or games - information about operating system program changes before it informs competitors , thereby putting the latter at a disadvantage . Yet some observers argue that , by establishing an industry standard with MS-Dos that enables PCs from hundreds of different manufacturers to 'play' the same applications programs , Microsoft has contributed significantly to the proliferation of PCs over the past decade , creating a Dollars 50bn worldwide industry dominated by US hardware and software manufacturers . If the US justice department decides to pursue the anti-trust action and succeeds in restraining Microsoft , this could damage the entire software industry . 'We are not asking the FTC to break Microsoft apart , ' Mr Bradford insists . 'What we want is to enable customers to walk into a computer store and have the freedom to choose among a broad choice of operating systems programs , or network operating system programs or applications programs . The customer would benefit from increased competition . ' Novell , which is leading the crusade to persuade the justice department to step in , would benefit if Microsoft were forced to modify its business practices . However , dozens of other software and computer companies , including Borland International , WordPerfect and Lotus Development , have provided the FTC with information about Microsoft 's alleged violations of anti-trust laws and would stand to gain equally . Steve Jobs , founder of Apple Computer and now chairman of Next Computer , has publicly called for the break-up of Microsoft into two companies , one for operating systems , the other for applications programs . He charges that Microsoft 's monopoly restricts innovation in the PC industry . As the FTC conducted its investigations , it found that Microsoft's competitors were keen to share their stories of the industry leader's tactics . ' I 've met with the FTC about 10 times and it is very clear to me that the FTC staff has concluded that Microsoft 's practices are not only unlawful but incredibly harmful to the US industry , ' says a senior executive at another large PC software company . Yet on two occasions - first in February and then on Wednesday - FTC staff recommendations for anti-trust action against Microsoft have failed to win a majority vote from the four commissioners considering the case ( see below ) . Two of the commissioners have not been convinced . 'They have been persuaded by Microsoft they are simply hearing whining and complaints from companies that envy Microsoft 's success or are not as clever or competitive , ' another software industry executive says . Microsoft remains stubborn . While consistently denying any wrongdoing and co-operating fully with the FTC investigation , executives reject any suggestion the company might need to modify its practices to avoid even the appearance of anti-trust violations . The company says it does not want to be constrained by having to 'second-guess what a government agency might think' about business decisions . 'The considerations are : is it in our business interests , is it in the customers ' business interests , is it legal and moral ? And if it is , then we go ahead and do it . In the long term , the FTC and all the enforcers will recognise that that is the way business decisions ought to be made , ' Mr Mike Maples , Microsoft executive vice-president , has said . Yet Microsoft can not be complacent . The FTC has the power , if it decides to use it , to change the shape of the US software industry , loosening Microsoft 's hold on the market and launching a free-for-all whose outcome is unclear . While a fragmented industry might benefit some players , it could have a detrimental effect by confusing customers and thus slowing PC sales . With the FTC anti-trust case stalled , Microsoft 's critics are considering other options , such as bringing a private anti-trust action . That could tie up Microsoft 's resources for years and divert its energies . Maybe conciliation would be a more advantageous response . Microsoft might care to look at the example of Intel , the world 's largest semiconductor chip maker . It was also the target of competitors ' allegations of anti-trust violations , but was exonerated by the FTC after it instituted a company-wide training programme to make its employees aware of anti-trust laws . Perhaps there is a lesson there for Microsoft , although its competitors might wonder whether it is the right one .