BRITISH AEROSPACE 'S efforts to salvage its proposed joint venture to produce regional aircraft in Taiwan appeared in further trouble yesterday when a Taiwanese official said the government would take no further direct part in the negotiations . It emerged that basic differences over the deal separate the two sides . Mr Wang Chieh-min , director-general of the Industrial Development Bureau , part of Taiwan 's industry ministry , told state radio that the government would no longer involve itself directly in negotiations between Taiwanese companies and foreign aerospace companies . The government 's function should be to improve the investment environment , he said , with other tasks left to the companies involved . The latest move , however , may reflect serious divisions in Taipei over the value of such a deal . The crucial difference between the two sides , according to negotiators , is that BAe will not give a long-term commitment to the project . Taiwan is insisting that BAe commit itself not just to selling the RJ series of regional aircraft but to developing the next generation of aircraft , which analysts suggest could cost Pounds 1bn . BAe refuses to give such a commitment until the deal is signed and market research shows there is a viable market . Sources close to BAe say it broke off the latest talks last month because 'there was no real co-ordination on the Taiwanese side . They did n't come with authority ' . If the deal collapses it would undermine BAe 's attempts to improve its profits . In the past three months , the Taiwanese government has played a formal role in reconciling differences between BAe and its proposed partner , Taiwan Aerospace Corporation . The government wants to enter the civil aerospace industry as part of its industrial policy . However , the deal has stirred political controversy in Taiwan on commercial grounds . The deal involves Taiwan injecting Pounds 120m cash into BAe 's lossmaking regional aircraft business . BAe 's regional jet range was designed in the 1970s and since then there has been increasing demand in Asia for aircraft with a longer range and larger passenger-carrying capacity . BAe has spent this week trying to restart the talks for the week starting October 18 . The next TAC board meeting , at which the future of the joint venture will be discussed , takes place on October 19 . Taiwan survey , Pages 29-32 Ballast Needham sale , Page 21