BRITISH AEROSPACE and Taiwanese officials appeared last night on the verge of saving the proposed Pounds 250m joint venture to build regional aircraft which is central to BAe 's efforts to improve its profitability . An agreement on a new financial structure for the venture could be signed as early as today . The project , called Avro , stalled last month after some Taiwanese banks lending money became worried about whether or not it would be profitable . Avro will produce the RJ series of regional jets which currently loses money for BAe . Mr John Cahill , BAe 's chairman , and a team of four senior executives have been in Taiwan since Monday trying to reassure Taiwanese bankers and politicians and negotiate a formula for the deal . Few details of a new financial structure were available last night although it will almost certainly not include government guarantees for the loans , said Mr Yang Shih-Chien , vice-minister of economic affairs , who has been closely involved in the talks . The solution could involve spreading risks to Taiwanese banks based abroad . It is also likely to include measures involving lease finance for aircraft built by Avro . The cautious approach of Taiwanese banks has been prompted partly by their unfamiliarity with western leasing techniques . At least one other problem blocking a final agreement also appears to have been resolved . Taiwan has backed down from insisting on guarantees that a new generation of regional aircraft would be developed by Avro . Instead , a decision to proceed will be taken only after the completion of market research aimed at assessing the number and timing of potential sales , the design likely to sell well and economics of establishing production lines . Some problems would remain however . Taiwanese bankers and politicians want stronger guarantees that BAe would transfer some technology , design and manufacturing skills to Taiwan . The Ministry of Economic Affairs has made it clear to potential foreign partners that Taiwan wants to progress beyond the manufacture of high technology components to their integration into finished products . Mr PK Chiang , economics minister , has said that resolving the remaining issues would still 'require some time ' . The original deal to establish the joint venture was signed in January by Mr Cahill and Mr Denny Ko , the president of Taiwan Aerospace Corporation . Initial markets for both new and existing aircraft types would be Taiwan's domestic airlines , with which TAC is 'well connected ' , said the TAC senior vice-president . Other potential markets are the fast-growing south-east Asia and China . Taiwan link , Page 2