NORTH KOREA , facing strong international condemnation over its abrupt withdrawal from the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty , heightened the tension yesterday by declaring that war could break out 'at any time ' . However , the new South Korean government of President Kim Young-sam appeared to warn western allies not to react rashly to North Korea 's decision to pull out of the NPT and drive Pyongyang into deeper isolation , which could provoke a military response . Mr Ri Tcheul , North Korean ambassador to the United Nations in Geneva , said Pyongyang had ceased to grant visas to foreigners . He claimed that in the current US-South Korean 'Team Spirit ' military exercises , bullets and shells were being fired 'towards our side ' . 'If we respond to it , it will mean a war and this war can not but be an all-out war , ' Mr Ri said . 'That is why we are stressing that a hair-trigger situation has been created which could lead to an outbreak of war at any time . ' In Seoul , President Kim said : 'We never want North Korea to be isolated internationally nor do we want to inflict suffering on them . ' He emphasised that a diplomatic solution should be found . Foreign Minister Han Sung-joo told the National Assembly : 'We must prevent an armed conflict on the Korean peninsula at all costs . . . We do n't want the situation to go to extremes because of the North Korean step . ' Mr Han said South Korea was seeking the help of China , which retains links with North Korea , to persuade Pyongyang to reverse its decision before the issue reaches the UN Security Council . Beijing has indicated it is displeased by the North Korean action . In Washington , President Bill Clinton said he was disturbed by North Korea's withdrawal from the nuclear treaty , but hoped it would 'reconsider its position ' . The International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna will hold an emergency meeting on Thursday to discuss North Korea 's refusal to allow inspections of two sites suspected of being military nuclear facilities .