NEW ZEALAND 'S apple growers are in a buoyant mood as they pick the new season 's fruit . Thanks to the Japanese the export outlook has never been rosier . From June New Zealand looks set to be the first major apple producer in the world to be able to export its fruit to Japan , which has a keen appetite for the fruit . This depends on final acceptance by the Japanese that New Zealand can effectively control various moth parasites . New Zealand exporters acknowledge , however , that gaining a sizeable share of this market will not be easy : for a start the Japanese prefer larger rosy coloured apples of a type they do not now produce , and the condition must be superb . Luckily New Zealand , which has been pioneering new varieties for world markets , believes it could have the answer in an unnamed variety , still known as GS2085 . In the meantime exporters hope the Japanese might be persuaded to eat Granny Smiths , Royal Gala , and some other export varieties . The optimism follows the agreement in principle reached late last year on the treatment of New Zealand apple pests . Mr Joe Pope , chief executive of the Apple and Pear Marketing Board , says he is 'very confident ' that the agreement will soon be formalised . 'But it represents a huge challenge . Japan is the most demanding market in the world , and our success there depends only on our ability to perform . ' He says that apples are at present a high-priced luxury in Japan . The large blemish-free fruit produced domestically are virtually hand reared : as each apple is grown it is put into a succession of paper bags to protect it . Apples are sold individually , with a family dividing one up between them . Mr Pope says New Zealand will have to develop varieties for this market , although Royal Gala would seem suitable , as would the new variety GS2085 . 'That will have considerable potential there , ' he says . At present only Korea is permitted to export tiny quantities of apples to Japan so New Zealand has scored something of a coup , Mr Pope claims . He warns , however , that the US is also working hard at securing a similar agreement with Japan and might be as little as six months behind New Zealand .