CANADIAN Pacific yesterday sold its 61 per cent stake in Canadian Pacific Forest Products , leaving another big Canadian forestry company without a controlling shareholder . CP raised CDollars 698m ( USDollars 545.3m ) by selling its 36.7m CP Forest shares to a group of Canadian securities dealers for CDollars 19 per share , payable in three instalments over the next two years . The underwriters immediately offered the shares to the public . An official at Nesbitt Thomson , which led the group , said yesterday that the shares were 'very well received ' . Mr William Stinson , CP chairman , said that forest products 'no longer fit our core business strategy ' . He said that while CP Forest will benefit from economic recovery , 'we believe that its markets will remain cyclical and we 've decided to realise cash now ' . CP has indicated that it would concentrate on its rail , energy and property interests . It is expected also to reduce its 47 per cent stake in Laidlaw , the waste and transport services operator . 'We believe that the best way to grow and to create value is to put our capital to work in fewer businesses , ' Mr Stinson said . Proceeds from the CP Forest sale will go towards reducing CP 's debt . Other Canadian pulp and paper producers which have recently been spun off by controlling shareholders include MacMillan Bloedel , which was part of the Bronfman group , and Quno , previously owned by the Chicago Tribune . Several other divestments are planned . CP Forest is one of North America 's biggest newsprint producers and also a large producer of market pulp and construction timber . It suffered a CDollars 113m loss on sales of CDollars 941m in the first half of 1993 . The company has spent more than USDollars 1bn over five years to modernise its Canadian mills . It recently raised CDollars 230m in cash by spinning off its western Canadian wood products operation into a publicly-held company . CP Forest shares fell CDollars 1.62 to close at CDollars 18.85 on the Toronto stock exchange yesterday . Canadian Pacific dropped 25 cents to CDollars 21.50 .