ONE SUSPECTS that Ferdinand Magellan would have been the first to hand over Pounds 693 for a round-the-world air ticket . The Portuguese explorer , whose bold foresight led to the first circumnavigation of the globe in 1521 , paid a far higher price . Before he had completed his voyage , Magellan became embroiled in a dispute with rowdy islanders who relieved him of his life . Modern-day adventurers have it far easier . For a modest Pounds 693 , Trailfinders ( tel : 071-938-3366 ) can send you circumnavigating via Hong Kong , Bangkok , Sydney , San Francisco and New Orleans . Flights depart from five UK airports . Tickets , which must be booked by May , are open for one year . According to STA ( tel : 071-937-1733 ) , there is no such thing as a standard round-the-world itinerary . Many people fly to Australia via south-east Asia , then across the Pacific to North America before returning to Europe . But one need not be tethered to such norms . One could follow a similar route in the opposite direction , or call in on Africa or South America along the way . Travellers with time on their hands may elect to intersperse flights with overland sections , say Bangkok to Singapore or Perth to Sydney . Here are two STA itineraries to give you some idea : London-Rio-Auckland-Sydney-Singapore-London ( Pounds 989 ) ; or London-LA-Honolulu-Tonga-Samoa-Auckland -Sydney-Singapore-London ( Pounds 836 ) . Even these are humdrum in the grand scheme of things . For little extra one can add on destinations such as Vietnam , the Gallapagos islands or Beijing . Even Mongolia and Madagascar are within reach . Before booking , here are a few cautionary tips : Decide how much time you have . Magellan 's expedition took two years ; yours should last at least a month , although a colleague of mine compressed five transglobal destinations into a confusing 11 days . If your time is fairly limited , do not attempt too much . Your global experience could end up a saga of airport lounges and hurried city tours . Three or four days is a sensible minimum for each stop , enabling you to adapt to time changes . Plan ahead . If you are stopping in Delhi , ask yourself why . Can you see the Taj Mahal in the 24 hours you have allotted for India ? ( You probably can not , and certainly should not try . ) Is Tahiti fearfully expensive ? Is Lima safe ? Can you find accommodation in Zanzibar ? Is Easter Island nice at Easter ? Most people will find it best to book hotels in advance , avoiding the agony of spending jet-lagged hours in search of accommodation . You may well be able to arrange hotel discounts in conjunction with your ticket . Multiple stopovers mean multiple visas and multiple headaches . Put in your applications in good time . Some embassies and consulates insist on keeping your passport for several days , though many now run an overnight service . Most travel agents can help with visas , or contact Visa Service ( tel : 071-833-2709 ) . Take out travel insurance . Without it , a lost ticket usually means buying yourself a replacement . Watch out , too , that overzealous check-in staff do not remove more than one ticket docket at a time . You could find yourself in Guangzhou airport explaining that the ticket stub for your next leg is in a dustbin at Singapore airport . Other agencies you might try are : Bridge the World ( tel : 071-911-0900 ) ; Quest Worldwide ( 081-547-3322 ) , and Travel Mood ( 071-258-0280 ) . The latter offers around-the-world business class fares at below Pounds 2,000 .