EVIDENCE that Iraq used lethal nerve agent weapons as well as mustard gas against its own Kurdish citizens in 1988 has been found by scientists at the UK 's Chemical and Biological Defence Establishment . Soil samples from the village of Birjinni in northern Iraq have shown traces of the nerve agent sarin . Iraq is also alleged to have used nerve agents in the attack on Halabja near the Iraq-Iran border earlier in 1988 , but this has not been proven . Although nerve agents have existed since the 1930s , when sarin and other substances were developed by Nazi Germany , this is the first ever documented evidence of use . A British official said Iraq was probably the first country to have employed nerve gas , which affects the central nervous system , causing breathing difficulties , involuntary movements and death . Scientists of the US organisation Physicians for Human Rights collected the samples in 1992 from the craters left by one of three bomb clusters . Dr Graham Pearson , the CBDE 's director general , said one set of samples provided traces of mustard gas , which damages the skin , respiratory tract and eyes . The other set , including metal fragments , contained an acid that Dr Pearson said could only have come from sarin . Four people are known to have died after the attack . But samples from the graves of two victims showed no traces of chemical weapons . The attack took place in August 25 , shortly after the ceasefire between Iran and Iraq . It is believed to have been the last time Iraqi forces made use of their nerve weapons . Dr Pearson said he hoped the findings would deter states from thinking they could get away with chemical warfare without leaving evidence . They would help to underpin the Chemical Weapons Convention which , since it was opened for signature in January , has been signed by 145 countries and will come into force at the earliest in January 1995 . Iraq 's stockpile of chemical arms is in the process of being destroyed under UN auspices . But a British official admitted ; 'You can never be absolutely certain that you have detected all the weapons . '