BRITISH Aerospace yesterday signed an agreement with Taiwanese officials on the financial structure of a proposed joint venture to build regional jet aircraft . The deal came on the fifth day of intensive talks between a team led by Mr John Cahill , BAe 's chairman , and Taiwanese bankers , politicians and industrialists . The venture marks a breakthrough for Mr Cahill 's strategy to improve BAe's profitability . The RJ series of aircraft that the joint venture will build partly in Taiwan currently loses money for BAe . The turning point in the tough negotiations came on Wednesday when Mr Cahill and Mr Liang Kuo-shu , chairman of Taiwan 's state owned Chiao Tung Bank , initialled a draft financial structure for the venture , called Avro International Aerospace . They then sent that draft on its tortuous journey through a series of politicians and bank officials who needed to give their approval . The final stage , a nod from Mr Lien Chan , Taiwan 's prime minister , came yesterday . The agreement was signed by Mr Cahill , Mr Liang and Mr Hou Chun-hsiung , chairman of Taiwan Aerospace Corporation ( TAC ) , BAe ' s manufacturing partner in the venture . It marked the end of a tough week for both sides . Taiwan 's top bankers and politicians - professions which sometimes overlap in Taiwan - had just emerged from a turbulent congress of the ruling party , the Kuomintang . Mr Cahill and Mr Charles Masefield , president of BAe 's Regional Jet division , had cut short summer holidays at the weekend to fly in from the US and Europe respectively . A hectic series of meetings began at 7am on Monday morning . For the next two-and-a-half days , BAe 's five-strong team visited lawyers , bankers , politicians and industrialists in their offices dotted about Taipei . The talks were essentially over fears within the Taiwanese banking consortium planning to lend money to Avro that the venture was too risky . These fears were based on the knowledge that the RJ series of aircraft that Avro would build partly in Taiwan had lost money for BAe . There were also concerns that an associated aircraft leasing company would suffer a repeat of troubles experienced by western aircraft leasing companies such as GPA . However , the agreement involves an effective Taiwan government guarantee of loans to Avro . BAe also agreed that the leasing facility of substantially more than Dollars 250m would only be tapped when firm orders for the aircraft came in . There was little inkling last January when the original contract was signed that there lay ahead a gruelling struggle to convince Taiwanese banks to lend to Avro . It was almost three months after the January signing of the contracts that problems began to emerge . Mr Hou of TAC fell seriously ill and was unable to work for more than three months . US-educated Mr Denny Ko , TAC 'S president , was left in control of the company . But he had come from a US corporate environment , having worked for Los Angeles aerospace company TRW and run his own company in California . By his own admission , he found the transition more difficult than he had expected . Relations between TAC and the consortium of banks slated to lend money to Avro began to deteriorate . By midsummer , the government stepped in to save the deal from collapse . At the end of July in an attempt to improve the banks ' confidence in the deal , the government officially backed Avro . But it was not enough and talks between middle-ranking UK and Taiwanese negotiating teams in Taiwan stalled . This triggered a series of exchanges between Mr Cahill and senior Taiwanese politicians that culminated last weekend in the arrival from various continents of BAe 's top management . In spite of yesterday 's signing , compromises have yet to be worked out on some of the non-financial conditions . These differences , and the incorporation of the Chaio Tung Bank into existing contractual arrangements between BAe and TAC , are to be completed at meetings in London on September 6 . After that , the way should be clear for Taiwan to begin working on RJs in the spring of 1994 . At BAe it is a lifeline for the RJ programme , which began life in the late 1970s as the BAe 146 . Its early days were dogged with technical difficulties and the company struggled to improve the reliability of the aircraft . By 1991 , reliability had reached international standards , but competition from the likes of Dutch company Fokker , and a growing recession , did n't help sales . At the start of 1992 , therefore , BAe decided to seek international partners , hitting almost by accident on Taiwan just as a proposed joint venture between Taiwan and US aircraft manufacturer McDonnell Douglas began to founder . Mr Cahill made his first visit to Taiwan in May 1992 . In January 1993 , he and Mr Ko signed a manufacturing agreement in London , but it was only yesterday that the financial structure of Avro was resolved . For Taiwan , the offer from BAe came at an opportune time . Some of the difficulties with the McDonnell Douglas proposals did not apply with BAe : Its aircraft were proven designs , the investment would be in the hundreds of millions of dollars , rather than billions , and there was a larger potential market among domestic carriers flying short trips across Taiwan 's rugged countryside . And as one leading Taiwanese lawyer put it this week : 'Two failed attempts to set up an aerospace joint venture looks bad . '