CORPORATE financiers seeking to persuade institutions and individuals to invest in Lloyd 's yesterday welcomed the publication of a new guide for corporate investors , increasing hopes that the insurance market can attract fresh capital next year . The Lloyd 's guide outlines the terms on which corporate members with limited liability will be able to trade at the market . Final approval of the scheme , originally mooted 18 months ago , depends on a vote by Names , the individuals whose assets support the market , at an extraordinary general meeting on October 20 . Mr David Rowland , Lloyd 's chairman , said existing Names would not be 'squeezed out ' by corporate capital , arguing that new corporate money would compensate for a decline in commitments by existing Names after losses of more than Pounds 6bn in the past five years . Mr Peter Middleton , chief executive , said corporate investors would bring new confidence and security to the market . Based on a draft circulated in July , the guide contains few surprises for bankers , who are working on a variety of investment trust and investment company schemes to support syndicates . It states that corporate members must have minimum net assets of Pounds 1.5m and must deposit an amount equal to 50 per cent of their capacity ( the amount of premium they are allowed to underwrite ) with Lloyd 's . Syndicates would normally be allowed to obtain no more than 50 per cent of their capacity from corporate members , and no more than 25 per cent from one corporate member alone . Sir Laurie Magnus , director and head of corporate finance at Samuel Montagu , the merchant bank , which with James Capel is aiming to raise up to Pounds 250m to support a range of Lloyd 's syndicates , said the guide was 'along the right lines . We 're reasonably confident ' . Mr Marty Dolan , part of the corporate finance team at Salomon Brothers , said : 'The rules look good although they require detailed study . ' However , bankers cautioned that success was not guaranteed . 'Our institutions are quite excited but they will want to see the small print , ' said Sir Laurie . Lloyd 's may seek market cash to settle writs , Page 8 ; Editorial Comment and Observer , Page 17 ; See Lex