When the 1971 rock musical Godspell was new here , I was too sophisticated to go to see it . Now that my brow has dropped a bit , I have been looking forward to catching up with a show that so moved many of my generation . But you would have to have your brow around your ankles to take this revival seriously . It is pointless , it is insincere , its Jesus story here is virtually stripped of plot , and Jesus himself becomes ( a ) a joyless wimp and ( b ) a pontificating creep . And - worst crime in a musical - the songs are sold short . You hear spirituals without spirit , soul anthems without soul , rock numbers without rock . Music and text have been heftily revised . The show wants to recapture the feeling of 1971 , yet also wants to be tuned in to Now . ( Someone even says 'Fatted calf ? Oh - Paul Gascoigne . ' ) Everyone onstage is dressed in the way-in Carnaby Street gear of pre-'71 fashion ( the nastiest bellbottoms I've seen in 20 years ) , but one of them makes a joke about wearing Reeboks . The disciples keep re-telling Jesus 's parables in various showbiz guises . The Prodigal Son story is like a Crimebusters report ; and the story of seed cast upon stony , weedy , or fertile ground is re-told like an episode of Blind Date . Usually these comic turns seem only to send up Jesus 's original stories . Yet at least they are lively , whereas Jesus himself is a drab . When he explains to 'Cilla ' that she has missed the point of Blind Date 's seed parable , you want the ground to swallow him up . Cilla , as it happens , is imitated with happy panache by Gemma Craven , who is also the only interesting singer in the cast of 12 . As soon as she starts to sing 'Day by Day , ' you know that here is a properly supported voice , individual in timbre , singing calmly and steadily , but with a simple authority that actually sounds heartfelt . ( Pity about her hairdo . ) However , the way the show wastes her talents is beyond belief . In both that number and 'By My Side , ' other voices soon drown hers . The way that other singers have been encouraged to coarsen famous songs like 'Bless the Lord ' and 'Turn Back , O Man ' is dismal . Andy Crane ( he of children 's TV ) tries , not very hard , to be Jesus ; and his singing is grey , limp and often flat . In the Garden of Gethsemane , he asks 'What ? Can none of you stay awake one hour with me ? ' Answer : if we can , it 's no thanks to you , dear . James Gaddas ( Judas ) has more sheer presence , though no more persuasiveness . In a largely speaking role , Mark Greenstreet displays rather more force and sexiness than you might have believed from his work on Trainer . But no-one could really to be said to act , and some of the cute interplay among the ensemble is embarrassing . Both the director , Lindsay Dolan , and the musical director , Steve Brooker , do this show no service ; but since Stephen Schwartz , the original composer , has abetted them with new lyrics , he must take blame too . I wonder if even in 1971 the show honestly brought off its attempt to make the Word of God go down like a rock concert . Several of its songs are written for real singing ; but I remain suspicious of all that 1960s God-is-for-real-man . The most interesting feature is the photos of ( oh yes ) Jeremy Irons in the original London staging . Because the casting and dialogue have been adjusted to ingratiate an audience steeped in modern TV , this Barbican revival will have some limited success . Nothing , however , about the first-night ovation was spontaneous . At the Barbican Hall until August 30