HOPES of further substantial cuts in German interest rates following today's meeting of the Bundesbank policy-making council were damped yesterday after the German central bank released figures showing that broad money supply climbed at twice economists ' expectations in March . Broad money supply , traditionally the German central bank 's key indicator in its fight against inflation , grew at an annualised and seasonally adjusted rate of 3.2 per cent . Economists had hoped for an increase of at most 1.5 per cent after a slight reduction in M3 in both January and February . Disappointment with the figures , combined with poor news coming from Bonn about the scale of Germany 's public sector public sector deficit , helped prompt a fall in German bond prices . Yields on 10-year bonds climbed from 6.59 to 6.63 per cent , a pattern reflected in other European bond markets . A contradictory impulse came from the Bundesbank 's money market operations yesterday . The central bank cut the securities repurchase rate , the so-called 'repo ' rate at which it offers wholesale funds to the country's banking system , to 8.09 per cent from 8.11 per cent a week ago . The move was in line with a sequence of small cuts in recent weeks . At the same time , the Bundesbank injected a net DM5.8bn into the banking system , helping to drive overnight money market rates down sharply , from 8.20 to 8.09 per cent . This led to speculation that in spite of the M3 figure the Bundesbank may today cut money market rates still further , for example by announcing a fixed rate of less than 8 per cent for next week's repo . The Bundesbank blamed high credit growth for the increase in M3 , which includes cash , current accounts and short-term deposits . Bank lending to the private sector was DM23.2bn last month , a fraction below the DM24.1bn in March last year . Over the last six months , bank lending to the private sector rose at an annualised , seasonally adjusted rate of 9 cent , the Bundesbank said . Economists said that much of the increase was attributable to special factors such as an unexpected rise in public sector borrowing . They pointed out that even if the March figure was disappointing , it did nothing to alter expectations that the target for M3 growth this year - 4.5 to 6.5 per cent - would be met comfortably . Last year M3 grew at 9.4 per cent compared to a target of 3.5 to 5.5 per cent , the worst performance since targeting was introduced 18 years before . On March 18 the Bundesbank cut its discount rate by 0.5 per cent to 7.5 per cent , leaving the lombard rate at 9 per cent . The central bank is holding a press conference today , saying it wanted to present its 1992 annual report in detail . However such press conferences are unusual and the central bank may take the opportunity to cut rates further . Denmark 's Nationalbank , the central bank , reduced its key money market rates from 10.25 to 10 per cent yesterday , describing the move as bringing Danish rates into line with falling interest rates in other European centres , writes Hilary Barnes in Copenhagen . The Danish krone came under speculative pressure in early February , when money market rates for a few days rose to over 40 per cent , but interest rates have since then come down steadily .