IT ARCS up over the elevated highway that passes along Yokohama 's waterfront -70 stories of pristine post-modernist architecture . The Landmark Tower , the tallest building in Japan , is set amid 70 hectares of reclaimed land and disused docks , criss-crossed by empty new roads and abandoned railway tracks . The Tower was conceived in the late 1970s , financed during the bubble economy of the late 1980s and it will be finished just in time to join the worst glut of office space Japan has ever seen . When it was started in the late 1980s , the space was three times oversubscribed . With the opening due this summer only 50 per cent of the offices has been rented out . The glut is increasing every day as long-planned buildings are completed in Tokyo , Osaka and Nagoya , the main cities , and threatens to depress rents and commercial land prices for years to come . The property market will be haunted by an oversupply of office space for at least five years . The consequences could be devastating for property developers , many of whom have been driven to the verge of bankruptcy by the worst slump in Japan's residential land prices since 1945 . The property companies ' troubles means bad debts are likely to continue to flow into Japan 's severely weakened banks . The bank 's weakness could in turn limit their ability to lend to finance the economy 's recovery . There is some good news for the banks . The residential real estate market is reviving . At the peak in 1987 , residential land prices in the three main cities of Tokyo , Osaka and Nagoya rose by 33 per cent , followed by a further 22 per cent rise the following year . Last year they have fallen by about 15 per cent after a 4.2 per fall last year . In some central Tokyo areas such as Setagaya and Yokohama the fall has been about 59 per cent . Lower prices have brought houses within reach of first-time buyers with average earnings , prompting a sharp increase in construction work on owner occupied homes , up about 11 per cent in the first nine months of last year year . Sales of the cheapest condominiums worth Y40m ( Pounds 234,000 ) or less are higher than they were in either 1990 or 1991 , whereas sales of apartments which are more expensive than this are down . Tokyo 's stock of unsold condominiums is six times greater than during the height of the boom in 1987 . The Nomura Research Institute estimates this oversupply has reduced prices to a point where there could be a mini-boom in sales of cheaper apartments . Yet the grounds for optimism are limited . Sales of the most expensive apartments , which were built by speculators , are still sluggish . This unsold stock will hang over the market for years . Prices outside the main cities are only just starting to fall . The increase in sales of cheaper housing may not help the banks as their vulnerability is to the speculative real estate lending which went into luxury condominiums . Sales in these expensive apartments are likely to remain sluggish for at least a year . Mr Jun Konomi , NRI 's real estate analyst , expects residential land prices will be depressed for at least three years after falling by a further 10 per cent in the next year . However , the banks ' relief that an end to the fall in residential land prices may be in sight will be short lived . Prices in the commercial sector are about to plunge as the centre of Tokyo develops its first ever glut of unsold office space . The figures are alarming . In the last two years projects amounting to 4,679 hectares of office space were started in Japan , with about 2,300 hectares in Tokyo and Osaka . Over the next four years about 5.4m square metres of office space is planned within Tokyo alone . This extra space will be hitting the market just as the main client - the financial services industry - is cutting back on staff to reduce costs . This oversupply is yet to be reflected in official figures for office rents and commercial land prices because they are based on publicly quoted prices which bear little relation to the deals which tenants and owners do behind closed doors . Mr Yasu Ohno , Sumitomo Trust 's Bank 's long-serving real estate analyst , believes unofficial rents are often 40 per cent below published prices . Mr Konomi at NRI estimates that these lower rents mean commercial land prices in most of central Tokyo should fall by between 30 per cent and 40 per cent after an initial fall of about 7 per cent this year . Such a slump in the commercial property market can only be extremely worrying for the banks . The 21 top banks reported a 54 per cent increase in non-performing loans to Y12,300bn in the six months to the end of September . That largely reflects the deterioration of the residential property market . The looming slump in the commercial market is certain to sharply increase the banks burden of non-performing and rescheduled loans . Most of the excess Tokyo office development is within spitting distance of the city 's Otemachi financial centre district . It can be little consolation to the banks ' senior executives that they will be able to watch one of the reasons for their mounting bad loans build up each day before their very eyes .