I AM EMIGRATING to the US soon and , subject to negotiation , I intend to let my house - which I own outright - to my local council for three years under its private sector leasing ( PSL ) scheme . The council 's guide to PSL includes the statement : 'If you intend to live outside the United Kingdom , in consultation with your solicitor , you will need to appoint a power of attorney to look after your affairs . The power of attorney will assume all the obligations and responsibilities of the owner while you are away . ' This will include repairs and rent collection - the quarterly cheque will be sent to the power of attorney to avoid deduction of tax under the Income and Corporation Tax Act 1988 . Will I be liable for tax on the rent I get ? What is entailed by having a power of attorney ( my sister-in-law has agreed to act in this regard ) ? If I ask her to pay the rent into an offshore account held jointly by myself and my husband , is this legal ? I do n't want her to be charged tax on my behalf . If the rent will be your only source of income in the UK after the end of the UK tax year in which you emigrate , then it will be taxed here as though it were the only source of income of a UK-resident married woman , broadly speaking . Ask your tax office for the free booklet IR20 ( 1992 ) : Residents and Non-residents : Liability to Tax in the United Kingdom . The UK 's right to tax the rent is preserved by article 6 of the US-UK double taxation convention . If the rent is paid to your sister-in-law , she will indeed be assessed to UK tax on your behalf ( as your agent ) . She can certainly pay the rent into an offshore bank account , but she will want to be sure that you will always provide her with sufficient money to meet the tax demands on time ( as well as money to pay for repairs etc. , of course ) . Doubtless there is complete mutual trust between your sister-in-law and yourself , but she would be taking responsibility for your obligations and liabilities ( regardless of her ability to obtain reimbursement from you ) , so it is not something which you should ask her to do without cast-iron guarantees that she will not end up out of pocket or in an embarrassing situation . You might like to suggest that she consult a solicitor before deciding whether to accept the power of attorney which you are offering her ( and , no doubt , you will offer to meet the bill for her solicitor 's guidance ) . As a first step , you should talk to your own solicitor , who will be able to give you general guidance on your overall prospective tax position etc , as well as explaining the risks inherent in both granting and accepting a power of attorney . No legal responsibility can be accepted by the Financial Times for the answers given in these columns . All enquiries will be answered by post as soon as possible .