'AND then there is the merchandising . The picture books , T-shirts , video games , caps , stuffed toys , comic books , and pets . . .The zoo is the centrepiece of an enormous enterprise ' - Jurassic Park by Michael Crichton . Even by Hollywood standards , the hoo-ha surrounding 'Jurassic Park ' is mammoth . The new MCA/Universal dinosaur film , directed by Steven Spielberg and based upon Crichton 's best-selling novel , is at the centre of a publicity blitz fuelled by the entertainment industry 's biggest licensing and merchandising programme to date . In common with Crichton 's fictional zoo in which cloned dinosaurs run amok , the film of Jurassic Park has become the centrepiece of an enormous enterprise involving more than 100 companies licensed to sell over 1,000 products carrying the film 's distinctive emblem : a dinosaur skull silhouetted against a blood-red sky . Advertising for Jurassic products is expected to top Dollars 65m this year . With Jurassic Park opening at thousands of US cinemas tomorrow , stores are already loaded with everything from pyjamas and boxer shorts to video games , sweets and toys , trading cards , stickers , board games and puzzles , baseball caps and , inevitably , breakfast cereal . Ferrara Pan Candy expects to sell Dollars 30m ( Pounds 19.8m ) to Dollars 40m of fruit gum dinosaurs , dinosaur fruit snacks and jellies . Then there are stuffed animals from Dakin - a 30-inch brachiosaurus , smaller spitters , raptors and triceratops . Winterland Productions of San Francisco will turn out 30 to 40 different T-shirt designs based on scenes from the film . 'We will take dinosaur mania to a new level , ' gushes Linda Berkeley , senior vice-president of development and head of merchandising for MCA/Universal . 'All the enthusiasm , all the excitement has been building . We have such a comprehensive programme in play . Jurassic Park merchandising will far exceed that of any other movie . ' With MCA aiming to break the record of Dollars 1bn in retail sales set by Batman , merchandising revenue could also dwarf box office returns . Jurassic Park is expected to be the most expensive movie of the year , with production costs of Dollars 60m and costs of film prints and promotion estimated at more than Dollars 40m . For all the hype , however , there is bound to be apprehension with so much money at stake . However , as Marisa Carcio of the Toy Manufacturers of America , an industry trade group , points out , 'the success of the merchandising programme all depends on how well the movie is received . We are all anxious to see the public reaction . ' US toy makers have profited enormously in the past from tie-ins to movies such as Star Wars , but there have also been disappointments such as Dick Tracy and Hook . Jurassic Park merchandisers also face a significant challenge in differentiating their products from the wide range of dinosaur-related paraphernalia already on the market , and with which they may have to share shelf space in some stores . Another uncertainty is the appeal of toys , sweets and clothing aimed at young children that carry the logo of a film many will not see . Jurassic Park has received a 'PG13 ' rating in the US , meaning that children under the age of 13 must be accompanied by an adult . The film 's makers acknowledge that its 'intensity ' may be frightening for children aged under about nine or 10 . Yet as Carcio points out , even R-rated ( for adults only ) movies such as Terminator 2 can spawn successful toy products , while there are plenty of Jurassic Park products for older children . Sega of America is planning hand-held and TV video games and Nintendo fans will be offered dino-games by Ocean of America . McDonald 's is selling 'dino-sized ' meals : a triple cheeseburger , extra large portion of fries and a 32-ounce drink served in a Jurassic Park collector's cup ; its restaurants have been designated 'Jurassic Park visitor 's centres ' . Advance ticket sales suggest that Jurassic Park will be the hit movie of the summer . Already , cinemas are scheduling extra showings to accommodate demand . What can not be predicted is just how long the movie will pull the crowds . MCA is already planning follow-on products including a TV series and a theme park attraction that could cost more than the movie itself . Nobody is yet talking about Jurassic Park II , but who knows ? The original dinosaurs roamed the earth for millions of years . Spielberg 's creations may well have enough life in them for a sequel .