THE PEOPLE 'S Bank , China 's gold-purchasing agency , is facing increasing challenges to its gold trade monopoly at a time of rapidly rising demand for the precious metal among Chinese consumers . The establishment of a flourishing gold market in northern Liaoning province near the Soviet border almost certainly poses the most severe threat in years to the People 's Bank 's domination of the gold trade . 'Some stores trade gold bars , not just gold jewellery . See that 's serious . Of course , we 're worried there will be more such markets , ' said a People's Bank official this week . In an official statement the People 's Bank , the country 's central bank , has accused those responsible for the Liaoning market of spreading disorder in the gold jewellery market . It charged that gold merchants had 'harassed ' the state purchase plan . Under present rules , the bank is empowered to acquire all gold produced in China at about Yuan50 ( USDollars 8.70 ) a gram , two-thirds of the world price . Miners blame the depressed purchase price for lagging production , which reached about 110 tonnes last year , compared with demand of 250 tonnes . The China Daily said this week that the authorities were considering sweeping reforms , including price-reform , in the gold sector to boost production . The paper reported that gold production had declined in the first quarter this year , although it also observed that some miners may be withholding production from the state for sale on the booming local market . Under China 's present five-year plan ( 1991-1995 ) USDollars 1.3bn of investment in gold mines is proposed with the aim of increasing production by 40 per cent by 1996 . At present rates of production growth it seems unlikely China that will reach that target . News of the Liaoning gold market and reports that Beijing is considering seriously the establishment of a Gold Exchange coincide with reports that China has emerged as the world 's largest gold consumer . According to Gold Fields Mineral Services in its annual report 'Gold 1993' Chinese passion for gold jewellery , a desire by Chinese to hedge against a depreciating currency and heavy gold purchases by the People 's Bank contributed to the gold buying spree . The report said that the Chinese central bank might have purchased a substantial portion of the 400 tonnes of gold sold by the Netherlands central bank last year . China has not published gold reserve figures since 1981 . The People 's Bank official described the Liaoning market as ' a very sensitive problem '' , adding that the State Council , or Cabinet , had not resolved what to do about the unauthorised gold dealing , which appears to have been sanctioned by local officials , but not necessarily by the provincial government . Chinese officials have recently indicated an interest in involving foreign mining companies in the exploration and exploitation of China 's gold deposits , but this would require amendments to regulations that expressly forbid such foreign involvement . China has devoted much of its minerals exploration and development budget to the search for gold in the past two decades with limited success . Estimates of in-ground gold reserves stand at about 3,000 tonnes and were being added to at the rate of about 10 per cent annually .