WHILE US securities traders have been busy pushing long-term interest rates down to their lowest level in 15 years , they have been keeping a cautious eye on the commodities markets , sensitive to signals that President Bill Clinton 's economic plan may be stirring inflation 's embers . Inflation is toxic to bond prices , driving up interest rates and increasing the cost of debt . Commodity prices have long been used as a proxy for inflation , a practice lent legitimacy by the US Federal Reserve Board , which monitors price stability by watching a 21-commodity index compiled by the New York-based Commodity Research Bureau . Recent contradictions in the commodity pits have been enough to drive inflation-watchers to distraction . Palladium hit long time lows on Monday , while another industrial commodity , lumber , posted all-time highs . Grain prices have withered , but meat prices , which usually travel in tandem with feed prices , are on the rise . International commodities like sugar and oil have also rallied . On the whole , analysts say that there has been a steady but mild rise in several closely-watched commodity indices since late summer , when it became apparent that Mr Clinton might clinch the presidency . However , since he took office in January , the behaviour of the indices has diverged . Measures of industrial commodities and those heavily weighted toward energy are rising , while more broadly-based indices are flat . To date , none of the inflationary measures have sounded an economic alarm . 'We 're seeing some firmness in some commodities , but not firmness in all commodities , ' says Mr Samuel Kahan , chief economist at Fuji Securities . A real economic pick-up would bring firmness across the board , he said . The difference in behaviour of the commodities indices is explained by the differences in their composition . Economists looking for trends in US industrial production like to watch the Journal of Commerce Index . This follows the prices of 18 raw industrial commodities , including copper and steel scrap , burlap , old corrugated boxes and crude oil . The JOC index rose to 100.6 this week , from 97.5 in early January . The steady rally may signal a pick-up in industrial production , a natural introduction to an economic recovery . However , nearly 15 per cent of the index 's weighing is in lumber and lumber products , largely domestic commodities whose rally in recent months has , some analysts say , skewed the index . Industrial production may indeed be picking up , Mr Kahan says , but so long as the pick-up tracks economic growth it may not be inflationary . The Goldman Sachs Commodity Index has also been on the rise since January , reaching 186 this week , from 181 the first week of the year . The two-month rally is significant , says Mr. Ravi Bulchandani , commodities analyst at Goldman Sachs , but is only a small increase over January a year ago . Mr Bulchandani attributes the index 's rise to firmer oil and meat prices . The GSCI is weighted by trade volume , with nearly 50 per cent of its weight in energy or oil , and another 24 per cent in livestock . Given the international characteristics of the index , he attributes the GSCI's strength to the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries ' recent agreement on production cuts , and not to Mr Clinton 's economic plans . The Commodity Research Bureau 's popular index of 21 commodity futures is virtually unchanged since January , in part because each of its components carries equal weight . A drop in the price of orange juice , for example , carries the same weight as a rally in oil . The index is stuck around 203 , up about five points from its August low . Mr Sean McNamara , president of CIG Asset Management , a firm that advises investors on using commodity indices as a way to hedge against inflation and diversify portfolios , calls the GSCI an 'economically sound ' index , but says the CRB remains popular because it offers historical data extending back 40 years . Analysts say that while Mr Clinton 's economic plan is front-loaded , with much of the economic stimulus expected to take effect quickly , it can only hope to boost US demand . As commodity trading spans the globe there is potential for a flood of foreign imports if US prices move higher . This , commodity traders say , is already happening in the lumber market . Inflation fears are also tempered by excess capacity in the US in everything from aluminium smelting to grain production . In the long run Mr Clinton 's policies are expected to have significant impact in individual commodities . His energy tax , aimed at deficit reduction , will cut demand for oil and coal . However , to the extent that his energy taxes offend the US 's Opec trading partners , they could also reduce worldwide oil production , and raise energy costs , slowing global recovery . His emphasis on rebuilding the country 's infrastructure is bound to increase demand for industrial commodities like copper and steel , analysts say . However , the president 's greater focus on the environment may raise costs to livestock producers and other agricultural enterprises , limit expansion of mining and metals processing in the US , and limit US timber production . Clean Air provisions will further penalise energy producers . On the trade side , Mr Clinton has said he will be more strict in his dealings with China , an important customer for US wheat . He supports economic reform in the former Soviet Union but has not yet liberalised farm credits to Russia , allowing grain prices to languish . On the other hand , if Mr Clinton succeeds in implementing the North American Free Trade Agreement , US livestock producers are expected to benefit from broader export markets . -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- - CONSTITUENTS OF LEADING US COMMODITY INDICES -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- - JOC weight GSCI weight CRB ( % ) ( % ) ( unweighted ) -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- - Benzene 4.7 Crude oil 20 Maize Crude oil 7.1 Natural gas 14.8 Wheat Cotton 5.9 Heating oil 13.9 Soyabeans Burlap 5.5 Live cattle 15 Soyameal Polyester 2.7 Hogs 9 Soyaoil Printcloth 3.3 Farm products 20 Crude oil Scrap steel 6.3 ( consisting Heating oil Copper scrap 6.7 of : wheat , Unleaded gas Aluminium 6.1 maize , sugar , Copper Zinc 5.1 soyabeans , Lumber Lead 5.4 cotton & Cotton Tin 5.9 cocoa ) Gold Hides 5.5 Base metals 7 Silver Rubber 6.2 ( consisting Platinum Tallow 5.2 of : copper , Live cattle Plywood 7.9 aluminium , Hogs Corrugated zinc & nickel ) Pork bellies boxes 5.0 Precious Coffee Lumber 6.3 metals 2 Sugar Cocoa Orange juice -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -