I WAS on my way to the Surrey Docks Watersports Centre when I came across the story of the whale oil which lit the lamps of London . At the Watersports Centre , you can sail , canoe or windsurf if you are over eight years old and are able to swim 50 metres in light clothes . The whale oil story , less bracing but more intriguing , is on a Docklands Heritage information panel near the water 's edge at Greenland Dock . It says : 'Two hundred years ago , you would have been unhappily aware of the awful stench of rotting whale blubber . Each spring , small ships left here for six-week dashes to the icy , storm-blown Arctic waters off Greenland . Half-rotten whale blubber was brought back in casks and boiled in huge coppers on this dockside to extract the oil . Much of it was used to light the streets of London . ' Two hundred years later , the lights are no longer lit with oil and whale hunting is frowned upon . The part of the dock on which the information panel appears is now called Rainbow Quay after 'the Greenpeace ship Rainbow Warrior which campaigned against whaling . ' In 200 years ' time , visitors to Docklands may find the story of the twentieth century anti-whaling movement as interesting as the oil lamps of London . For the record , there are 11 watersports centres in London Docklands , a 200-metre artificial ski slope , three urban farms and dozens of pubs and restaurants , some of them very old . There is no leisure activity in Docklands , however , which beats wandering around . Docklands has acquired an awful reputation in some quarters . Some of it comes from local activists who objected to the breakneck development of the 1980s . More of it comes from people who have never been there but have persuaded themselves , all the same , that it has been a disaster . Many critics , in this newspaper as much as any other , have excoriated the architecture , the 'toy-town ' Docklands Light Railway and much else . I can not understand why . It is true that some of the office building is uninspiring . But some of the shopping areas in restored wharf buildings are excellent . And much of the residential development , low-rise and brick , is a distinct improvement on most of what was done all over London in the three preceding decades . Some of the outlying buildings at Canary Wharf - with their transplanted , straight-out-of-the-box , North American look - do bear a startling resemblance to the hotels at the Euro Disney theme park outside Paris . But the queues are shorter at Docklands than at Euro Disney and entertainment is available at a fraction of the price . The Docklands Light Railway swoops and veers like a fairground ride . It is easier on the stomach , however , than Disney 's Big Thunder Mountain and you can get on and off as you like . If the threat of IRA bombing had not ended plans to allow visitors to ride the lift to the top of the Canary Wharf tower , there would be no reason to visit the Paris theme park at all . Unlike Euro Disney , Docklands ' surprises are uncontrived . They slip from the layers of the past that you unravel on each visit , rather than from the minds of the Disney imagineers . So far-reaching were London 's trading links , that there is hardly a foreign visitor who is not going to find some Docklands connection . There is , for example , the Norway Cut Swing Bridge , Finland Quay East and West India Quay . Did you know that the Mayflower , which took the Pilgrim Fathers to America in 1620 , departed from the riverside quarter of Rotherhithe ? Or that its captain , Christopher James , is buried in St Mary 's churchyard , a short walk from the river ? Rotherhithe is a quiet , clean , settled-looking place . The residents could make much more of their American connection if they wanted to . Perhaps they do n't . The restored 16th century pub , which was once called the Spread Eagle , is now called the Mayflower . But apart from a small plaque explaining this , it does n't shout about it . The parish church of St Mary , Rotherhithe , has been a site of Christian worship for nearly 1,000 years . The current church , splendid in the spring sunshine , replaced one built in the twelfth century . It was completed in 1715 and was designed by John James , an associate of Sir Christopher Wren . It beats Sleeping Beauty 's Castle . A little more care could certainly have been taken to ensure that transport links were developed along with the offices and homes of the new Docklands , rather than as an after-thought . Some of the new transport facilities are already looking run-down . Island Gardens station , through which many tourists pass on their way to the Greenwich foot tunnel , was strewn with litter when I was there . But all these moans to some extent miss the point . To travel through Docklands is to realise that it has often been a place of chaos , of failed dreams , of wild booms and busts , of perseverance against the odds . German air raids in September 1940 destroyed all the timber in Surrey Docks -350,000 tons in one night . The flames were visible 30 miles away . On 57 consecutive nights from September to November 1940 , 25,000 bombs rained down on Docklands , making them the most heavily bombed civilian target in the country . But they stayed open . Once a gateway of world trade , Docklands ' calm waters are now free for windsurfing . On dry land , others had new aspirations for the area . No longer the destination of the world 's trading ships , some - such as Paul Reichmann , Canary Wharf 's failed developer - believed London 's docklands could be the electronic gateway to Europe , providing the offices from which business would be done at the tap of a computer key . Those new developers have added another layer to the Docklands story . Future visitors might see the results as the high-water mark of a greedy time , whose nemesis was both inevitable and richly-deserved . Or they might regard the new buildings , homes and shops as a testament to a much-maligned decade , in which , for all the accompanying chicanery and rough manners , a somnolent nation awoke , however briefly , to the promise of the future . Both interpretations assume the failure of Docklands in its newest guise . But that failure is not inevitable ; Docklands in its high-tech , electronic form , might rise again . What , after all , is a four or five-year property slump in a city as old as London ? In the Docklands Visitor Centre , a history of the area tells us that London 's prosperity died out after 410 AD But the city boomed again , even if did take 300 years .