I have been reading one of those gloomy essays on the corrosive effects of television . In the winter issue * of the journal Daedalus , Professor John Condry of Cornell University argues that dross on the box is stunting the development of American children . Television , he claims , is contributing to increased youth violence ( including rising rates of suicide ) , to physical and mental disorders , and to a secular decline in educational performance . Children once learned about society , and their place in it , from school and by directly observing adults in their local communities . Today , says Mr Condry , television is swamping these influences . On average American children spend an incredible 40 hours a week watching the box or playing video games - more than a third of their total waking hours . School , including time spent travelling and doing homework , absorbs another 40 hours . All other interactions with family and peers - which are potentially far more productive than TV - have to be crammed into just 32 waking hours , a fraction of the time enjoyed by past generations . As well as robbing children of precious time , TV distorts their sense of reality . Because it is designed primarily to sell things , it has to put a premium on gaining and keeping people 's attention . The easiest way to do this is by projecting violence . According to Mr Condry the average hour of children 's programming contains 25 acts of violence - far more than adult TV . Television distorts in other , more insidious ways . It depicts wealth as the key to happiness but rarely shows people working hard , because this would be dull viewing . TV thus leads children to seek 'quick fixes ' , to want things but not to see they must work for them . It also presents a dangerously simplistic moral code , typically dividing the world into heroes , who can do no wrong , and villains , who can do no right . Mr Condry 's indictment has to be taken seriously . If children spend more than a third of their waking hours watching TV , their characters must be moulded by it . Yet his criticisms do not apply to all commercially successful programming . The producers of the popular series Star Trek , to take one example , appear quite responsible . Back in the late 1960s , the starship Enterprise was run almost exclusively by white males ( there was a token black female communications officer and an Asian helmsman ) and toured the universe seemingly looking for trouble . In nearly every episode , Captain James Kirk proved his manhood by fighting with some unpleasant alien species ( surrogates for the evil Soviet empire ) and falling in love with a beautiful blonde guest star . Star Trek : the Next Generation ( the 1980s ' relaunch of the series ) shows distinct signs of progress . The cerebral Captain Jean-Luc Picard has superseded tough-guy Kirk . A blind black has a responsible post on the bridge . Women play a more active role and are no longer treated as mere sex objects ; the ship 's doctor and security officer , for example , are both female . As in the first series , the Enterprise is subject to the 'prime directive ' - essentially a code of non-interference . This year a third series - Star Trek : Deep Space Nine - has hit the nation's screens . Perhaps reflecting the more reactive stance of US foreign policy in the 1990s , it is set on a stationary space station rather than a roving starship . Waiting , rather than looking , for trouble is the station commander , Ben Sisko ( impressively played by Mr Avery Brooks ) , a black single parent . His deputy is a feisty female . The station is packed with aliens of all shapes and sizes , many of whom dislike and misunderstand each other - a metaphor for the friction endemic to America 's multi-racial society . Pushing back social frontiers , one leading character , the demure Lieutenant Jadzia Dax , is a fusion of two lifeforms . She has the body of a 28-year-old woman but the memories and ( partly ) mind of a combative old man and former mentor to Commander Sisko . This could provide scope for a sensitive exploration of gender and sexual identity . Deep Space Nine is not exactly great art . As in previous incarnations of Star Trek , each episode includes plenty of sanitised violence . But by reserving the best roles for minorities and women , and by spending as much time on social problems as on warfare , it at least sends some useful signals to children . Commander Sisko could become quite an important role model for young black boys . But even though some commercial TV may do more good than harm , Mr Condry is right to argue that the US has paid far too little attention to the social impact of this 'greedy institution ' . It seems pointless endlessly to debate ways of improving school education when so few restraints are placed on children 's TV curriculum . Ways could surely be found to reduce the number of childhood hours lost to the box , to increase the proportion of educational programmes , and to limit the portrayal of violence . ( One act of violence every two minutes seems excessive even for the US . ) After all , few parents would thinkingly consign their offspring , for 40 hours a week , to an institution as empty-headed and violent as commercial television . * 'Thief of Time , Unfaithful Servant : Television and the American Child ' . Daedalus , Winter 1993 .