COMMODITY SWAPS have been with us for nearly 20 years . But until three years ago , few raw material consumers or producers were actively using swaps to hedge their exposure to changes in commodity prices . Today , the interest in commodity swaps is rapidly gaining momentum , but there is still some way to go before this interest is turned into widespread use . The total value of deals done is still small . The International Swaps and Derivatives Association ( Isda ) , in its first analysis of commodity swaps , reckons they were worth , at the end of 1992 in notional principal terms of those outstanding , Dollars 18bn - and of those , only Dollars 3bn were non-energy swaps . But the market for total interest-rate swaps in the same period was far larger - valued at Dollars 3,850bn , with currency swaps worth Dollars 860bn . Still , having come from nothing a few years ago , the growth in use of commodity swaps is significant : they are a useful cost-effective and tailor-made vehicle , for users and producers of raw materials to manage their exposure to price risk of an individual commodity . In the swap , the commodity consumer normally pays fixed and the producer floating , protecting the latter from any drop in the commodity 's price . Usually , only payment streams are exchanged , rather than physical delivery taking place . And as the swap is tailored to the particular commodities being used/produced , the basis risk of using an imperfect substitute , say for jet fuel , when hedging in the futures market , is eliminated . But this still does not answer the main reason why the rise in the total value of the commodity swap market has happened now . Price factor : Base metal prices have hit six-year lows in recent months ; this has put a limit on downside risk . The cash price for copper currently trades at around Dollars 1,675 a tonne , near its six-year low when it touched Dollars 1,571 . And nickel is also at levels not seen since June 1987 , when it traded at Dollars 4,451 a tonne ( currently , nickel is trading around Dollars 4,675 a tonne ) . With base metal prices so depressed , there is a fair chance that their next move will be up . 'If I were a consumer , I would fix prices now as prices are so low . But if something happens , these prices would go higher quicker than you know it - that 's why we 're seeing such a lot of activity , ' says Robert Miller , vice-president of commodity risk management at Chase Manhattan Bank in London . And since commodity prices have a habit of being highly volatile ( acutely felt during the Gulf war ) , it is good time for raw material consumers who want to capture contango to lock in at current price levels . Understanding : Corporate treasurers are becoming increasingly familiar with the use of derivatives to manage their interest rate and currency exposures . A survey by Greenwich Associates , a Boston-based business strategy consultancy , found that 52 per cent of European and Middle Eastern institutions in early 1993 were hedging their currency exposure by using forwards of less than one year , and that 39 per cent used non-dollar interest rate futures or exchange-traded options . And , says Mr Per Sekse , vice-president responsible for commodity derivatives marketing in Europe for Chemical Bank , London , corporate treasurers seem increasingly willing to deal over-the-counter with the investment banks , rather than run their own hedging operations . The banks can also offer a wide range of tailor-made services and structures , says Keith Murphy , vice-president and head of commodity derivatives at J P Morgan , London : 'They are looking at very customised products , such as indices or baskets of commodities of the very specific exposures that they have . ' The more exotic commodity swaps have tended to be used by heavy energy users to hedge their fuel costs . Ed Speal , head of commodity transactions at Banque Paribas in New York , says he has done swaps on specific pipelines for natural gas and different grades of fuel oil . Also , by embedding options into the swap , he has been able make an even more attractive and flexible product . But for widespread use of the complex vehicles for all raw materials , a senior US investment banker says : 'The derivatives industry will get there , embedding four or five different risks into the one vehicle . Within the next year or two you will see the 'multi-risk swap ' . ' But the derivatives boffins have never been short on innovation . For most corporates , however , the plain vanilla structures remain the rule of thumb . And the majority of commodity swap vehicles tend to be settled against the monthly average price of the raw material . These Asian ( or average-rate ) products are particularly well suited to commodities . 'If an airline is buying jet fuel every day for a year , it is not worried by the specific price of the fuel on a specific day , but is more concerned by its average price , ' explains Mr Miller . But in the currency markets , 'as I know when apayment is coming in on a particular day , I am worried by the exchange rate on that particular day . ' Average priced swaps account for virtually all the energy swaps Mr Miller does , and around 75 per cent of metal swaps . Depth and maturity : As the number of banks involved and the amounts of swaps outstanding increase , liquidity in commodity swaps has risen and generally spreads have narrowed . And with higher liquidity in the market , longer-dated vehicles are now being seen . 'Commodity hedges on the exchanges a couple of years ago were only going out three to six months forward . Now , in the OTC market , hedges are extending one , two and three years forward and beyond , which has had a fundamental impact on the forward curve , ' says Mr Murphy , at J P Morgan . A strong and active domestic futures market is also important for the banks to lay off their own counterparty risk . ' A liquid futures market is not essential to structure a commodity hedge . But if we move away from products that do n't have a good underlying futures market , then we get into basis risk , and our prices have to reflect this , ' says Mr Sekse , at Chemical Bank . And if there are options on the future , he/she can buy and sell volatility and do his/her own delta hedging without fear of getting squeezed . But even though commodity swaps can provide a relatively cost-effective and flexible method to hedge raw material prices , some corporates are still wary . For example , Mr Sekse advised photographic film manufacturers on the benefits of hedging the silver price when prices were low . But as soon as prices picked up , they quickly saw the new levels as unsustainable and backed-off the hedge , expecting the next move in prices to be down . Mr Sekse had more success with frozen orange juice swaps used by fruit juice processing companies . The juice processors locked in at a rate of just under Dollars 1.00 a lb earlier this year , against a price now of around Dollars 1.30 a lb . But some of the manufacturers wanted to take profits , despite having hedged for 1994 , believing again the higher price would n't be sustained .