GERMANY 'S health minister , Mr Horst Seehofer , was yesterday facing angry criticism from doctors and health agencies for allegedly unleashing 'mass hysteria ' among former and future patients over the danger of HIV-infected blood products . In the face of a sharp drop in donors giving blood to collection agencies , Prince Botho zu Sayn-Wittgenstein , president of the German Red Cross , appealed for the whole debate to be 'de-emotionalised ' . 'The current Aids debate has led to great insecurity among millions of fellow citizens , ' he said . 'Countless patients are refusing essential blood transfusions , for fear of a possible Aids-infection . Many donors are asking anxiously what is happening to their blood . ' The Red Cross confirmed that there had been a 10 per cent drop in blood donors in the state of Baden-Wurttemberg and a 5 per cent decrease in North Rhine-Westphalia , perhaps out of fear of giving blood alongside Aids sufferers . In Koblenz , the local authority said yesterday that 88 hospitals and blood distributors , including one company in Austria and one in Switzerland , had been contacted since October 27 to warn them about possible receipt of HIV-infected blood from the UB Plasma laboratory in the town . Any plasma from the laboratory in the affected hospitals had been seized by the police , the authorities said . Four members of the company , including the chief executive , have been arrested and face charges of negligence in failing to ensure adequate HIV-testing of blood products . Evidence of inadequate testing at the laboratory , and suspicion that others could also be involved , has precipitated a national panic over blood products . A suggestion by Mr Seehofer on Wednesday that any former patient who had received blood in recent years should have be tested for HIV has caused pandemonium on hospital switchboards . The Marburger Bund , a federation representing some 57,000 hospital doctors , accused Mr Seehofer of acting 'over-hastily ' and without any scientific basis . In Berlin , Dr Ellis Huber , the chairman of the city medical council , denounced what he called a 'federal mass hysteria about Aids ' which had been unleashed , he said , by Mr Seehofer 's 'false alarm ' . Professor Hans Pohle , a leading Aids specialist , announced his resignation from the national Aids advisory council in protest . In a letter to the minister , he said there had been no reason to arouse a mass phobia . Mr Seehofer , who has previously enjoyed a high political reputation , particularly for pushing through drastic savings in the health service , angrily rejected the criticism as 'irresponsible ' . 'It is better to take one preventive measure too many , than to run the risk of a single HIV infection , ' he said .