NERVE CELLS from a patient 's intestine may soon be transplanted to cure brain disease , the British Association meeting at Keele heard yesterday . Animal studies at University College , London , show that nerve cells transplanted from a rat 's gut into its brain grow into the surrounding tissue , while at the same time nerves from the brain penetrate the transplant . Some of the animals had brain damage which would be a good model for human degenerative disorders , notably Huntington 's Chorea and Parkinson 's disease . Professor Geoffrey Burnstock , head of anatomy and developmental biology at UCL , says gut-to-brain transplants would avoid many problems posed by foetal transplants - where cells have been transplanted from human foetuses into the brains of Parkinson 's sufferers as a means of 'rewiring ' damaged nerves . More than 100,000 people in the UK suffer from Parkinson 's . Dr Peter Jenner of the Parkinson 's Disease Experimental Research Laboratories at King 's College , London , described the findings as 'very exciting ' . The foetal technique had been over-hyped and produced false hopes , because the foetal cells had not grown well enough , he said . The best results were on patients in Sweden but none had recovered sufficiently to stop taking drugs . Most of the chemical messengers which control brain activity are present in the gut cells . There would be no possibility of the transplant being rejected by the patient 's immune system , because it came from his or her own intestines . And the ethical objections to using foetal cells would not exist . The next stage in Prof Burnstock 's research will be to discover what it is about the gut transplant that triggers nerves in the brain to start growing . Usually damage to the brain is permanent because nerves do not grow back . If the factors responsible are isolated , they could be used to treat spinal injuries and other nerve damage . The UCL research also opens up the possibility of curing inherited brain disease . Gut-to-brain transplants could be used to deliver correct copies of faulty genes . Prof Burnstock said the nervous system of the gut was sometimes known as a 'small brain ' because it could sustain so many sophisticated reflex activities independently of the central nervous system . More than 60 of the transmitter chemicals it uses were also produced in the brain . It is not clear how soon the research could be applied to humans . Further animal studies are needed to find out how selective a transplant 's effect is and how its growth is controlled .