AS reflected in trade statistics , Dubai 's economy has rarely been so buoyant . The timing could not be better to implement , through the recently-created Economic Department , a strategy to take the emirate into the era - still a long way off - when a self-sustaining economic base will mean Dubai is no longer dependent on oil revenues . If government aspirations are met , the self-sustaining economic base will rest on three factors : traditional trade ; the leisure and business tourist industry ; and the continuing growth in the number of companies choosing Dubai as a regional services and light industries centre . But four essentials must be met if these ambitions are to be realised . First , there has to be regional political stability ; secondly , there must exist a coherent and effective legal framework within which all kinds of business can flourish ; thirdly , Dubai must have abundant energy supplies at affordable rates ; and lastly it must rest comfortably within the federation even if it retains degrees of autonomy on different issues . For the past five years , Dubai 's non-oil trade - the traditional core of its economy - has been growing at an annual rate of more than 20 per cent , official statistics show . Dubai caters for 70 per cent of the UAE 's total trade . Just over half is with Asian countries ; almost 30 per cent with Europe . For 1992 alone , imports totalled almost Dh60bn and re-exports almost Dh9bn . The main entry and re-export points are Port Rashid , a large and extremely efficient container port with an average re-export turnaround time of 24 hours ; Jebel Ali , the largest man-made container harbour in the world ; the dhow traffic on Dubai 's creek , the waterway on which it built its reputation as an entrepot ; and the air-cargo terminal which has a capacity at present of 250,000 tonnes a year . Greatly expanded over the years and always being improved , they allow Dubai 's life-blood to flow . The funds generated by this trade are several times greater - Dh70bn compared with some Dh10bn - than revenue from crude oil and gas . 'The funds for all this activity are entirely generated in the market , ' says Mr Bill Duff , chief financial expert at Dubai 's Central Accounts Office . 'They are not subsidised by the government whose oil revenues have to be concentrated on improving the infrastructure to cope with the increase in load . ' Dubai 's re-exports are greatly helped by periodic problems in Iran such as the imposition of quotas which limit imports . These may make it more difficult for other traders , but Dubai is near enough and with sufficient experience to give its Iranian community the necessary flexibility to take advantage of them . The Iranians themselves realise Dubai 's special role , for when they stipulated that all imports to Tehran and Bandar Abbas should go direct rather than through middle men , Dubai was exempted . But all this trade , as Mr Duff points out , is in cash investments 'which you have to try to stabilise ' . So to a very large extent is tourism and the investments made by foreign companies which choose Dubai as the preferred centre from which to service the wider Middle East and West Asia , the Indian sub-continent . Continuing political stability in the region , of the kind that has existed since the end of the Gulf war , is therefore vital while Dubai finds ways to attract more - and more valuable - investments . The advent into Dubai of so many companies , particularly in the past 2 1/2 years , has in turn unleashed a property boom in both house construction and rentals . Rentals , some businessmen insist , have risen more sharply than the actual increase in business turnover and , more importantly , profits . These , however , are cyclical factors . Of greater concern in the longer term is that these markets - houses , service offices , commerce - could decline as rapidly as they came if the right conditions are not established within Dubai to tempt more fixed investment . The government needs time to expand the infrastructure and the private sector needs time to consolidate the commercial gains of the past few years . Both of these factors are in play partly because the prolonged recession in the west has encouraged more and more companies to venture into the expanding Gulf market . Hence the phenomenal interest in regional exhibitions , including the forthcoming Air Exhibition . One answer to Dubai 's ( and the UAE 's ) need for more fixed investment in non-oil industries is to acquire the high technology industries that come with offset programmes . But as one visiting representative , in Dubai to discuss offset proposals , said : 'High technology industries are not like an invention . You can not create one and then leave it . You need the talent on-the-spot to run it and develop it further ' . A source close to the government added : 'Technology transfer and diversification are all fashionable to talk about , but they have to be viable before they set up here because they can not rely on government subsidies . Common sense and business acumen are Dubai 's greatest assets , and these are what we should build on . ' Overall strategy for Dubai 's economic development for the next decade is with the recently-formed Dubai Government Economic Department and Mr Mohamed Alabbar , its director-general . Although best known to Dubai 's business community as the man expected to streamline the process of issuing business and office licences ( and the principal target of their complaints when expectations are not immediately met ) , Mr Alabbar has an awesome task dealing with many other issues , for which he has earned the title of 'the government 's economic troubleshooter . ' He is credited with having turned round the government 's property and other investments in Singapore which it inherited from the Dubai entrepreneur Mr Abdul Wahab Galadari ; and more recently with having rationalised the structure at Dubai Aluminium Company , which he continues to direct . But the Economic Department under his direction also has to oversee other government onshore investments ; and represent Dubai at meetings of federal committees where all types of draft legislation are discussed , including the extent to which individual emirates retain degrees of autonomy . However the core of his responsibilities lies with trying to streamline the licensing process for companies wanting to register or to renew registration . His goal , he says , is to provide companies with their registration certificates within 48 hours of application and requests for information by fax on demand . This is ambitious to say the least given the amount and complexity of forms required , and the need for his staff to undergo 'customer service training . ' But by and large the business community acknowledges that progress has been made . Mr Alabbar says that a lot of the work that is done is not visible to the business community . His department is involved in continuous federal committee sessions and it is in these where Dubai 's voice is heard . He is quick to point out that many of those who sit on federal committees have been at school together , and that Dubai 's relations with other emirates at federal level are fundamental to its economic future .