EUROCOPTER , a Franco-German helicopter manufacturer , yesterday announced it had signed an agreement with three Russian companies to develop and market a 30-seat helicopter . Eurocopter is the first western helicopter group to establish an industrial partnership with the Russian helicopter industry . The group signed a co-operation deal with Mil , Kazan and Klimov to develop and market a 30-seat , 14-tonne civil helicopter . The craft , called the MI38 , will compete against western-produced models . The helicopter , expected to enter service in 1999 , will be developed at the Mil helicopter plant in Moscow . Mr Jean Francois Bigay , Eurocopter 's chairman , said the European group would invest about FFr550m ( Pounds 67m ) in the project . The Russian authorities had agreed to finance their share , he added . Eurocopter will be responsible for the cockpit , avionics system and passenger accommodation of the twin-engined helicopter . It will compete in the same market as the civil version of the EH101 helicopter under development by Westland of the UK and Agusta of Italy . The MI38 is also expected to challenge plans by Sikorsky of the US to develop a large helicopter , the S92 . Mr Bigay said market studies suggested an annual demand for about 300 large helicopters worldwide . Eurocopter is the west 's second largest helicopter manufacturer after Sikorsky . It was formed last year when Aerospatiale of France and Deutsche Aerospace pooled their helicopter activities . Russia has long been the largest producer of helicopters . Since the break-up of the Soviet Union , Russian companies have been seeking partnerships with western manufacturers to help them penetrate western markets . Western manufacturers have also shown growing interest in co-operation with Russian companies to break into the Russian helicopter market , which has been closed to western companies up until now , and is regarded as offering significant longer-term potential . Western aerospace manufacturers in general are keen to forge links with Russian groups . Agreements have already been signed between Russian companies and western airframes , avionics and aero engine companies , but until yesterday no agreement had been reached in the helicopter sector . However , the helicopter market continues to be under pressure because of the decline in military spending and economic slowdown . Eurocopter booked 159 new helicopter orders last year compared with 256 in 1991 , reflecting the general decrease in the industry .