FOR two years , Andre Knecht , national singles sales manager for Warner Bros Records , wanted to join the data superhighway with a CompuServe forum about the music industry . He won his chance in mid-September when the Music Vendor forum joined what CompuServe spokeswoman Debra Young says is 400 forums on the online service . Warner Bros is using its new outlet , accessible to 1.4m CompuServe subscribers throughout the world , to post new release information that is normally disseminated only within the music industry through flimsy new-release books . Warner pop group Depeche Mode conducted an online press conference on the Music Vendor forum and Knecht fields questions on changing personnel of rock groups by staying late at the office to log on . Warner Bros does not expect to sell anything directly on CompuServe because , although shopping is an option of CompuServe 's 'electronic mall , ' information is really the service 's stock in trade . Information generates the most sales , as when people log themselves onto airline reservation systems and figure out their own itineraries or buy shares more cheaply than through brokers . But then CompuServe has extensive research for stock-market investing , including a screening service to highlight variables like book value , growth rate , debt/equity ratio and yield . A stock quote is constantly at hand by typing GO BASICQUOTES , and the Analyzer answers financial and ownership questions . CompuServe 's income comes from keeping subscribers logged onto the system . CompuServe supplies the information while outside vendors make the sales . For less than Dollars 10 a month , subscribers get unlimited use of free services but many are surcharged , including even the Music Vendors forum , though stock quotes are free . As 'the Swiss army knife of all online services , ' ( in the words of PC World magazine ) , CompuServe has the most comprehensive online service . But others have found their own niches in a field where information overlap is almost unavoidable . The Dow-Jones service has exclusive online use of the Wall Street Journal , its own flagship publication , while Mead Data Central secured exclusive online use of the New York Times for its Nexis service . Other popular networks are Prodigy , a co-production of IBM and Sears , which has a consumer bent ; GEnie , General Electric 's consumer data service , which is popular for online conversation and having the latest shareware ; and America Online , a newcomer with less information but speedy communications . THE Windows interface has made access to the databases merely a few mouse clicks on provided software . Once logged on , subscribers see icons highlighting areas of access like news , research , investing , and travel . The services differ in the way they charge , some putting limits on the time made available with the monthly fee . All have surcharges for special services . All these online networks are provided by for-profit companies , but the network of networks , which carries thousands of networks besides these , is government-subsidised and non-profit . The Internet , as it is called , came to prominence when Vice-President Al Gore discussed the data superhighway of the future , which he expected to be a public-private collaboration . Many noted that such a thing already existed - Internet - which began as the means for academic exchange . It gradually grew to include companies exchanging data with customers , suppliers and their own far-flung outposts . The debate over who should control the Internet goes on while commercial activity leaps through the cyberspace . Rupert Murdoch 's News Corp. announced that it intends to buy Delphi Internet Services which connects customers to the Internet , while American Telephone & Telegraph said that it soon would connect customers to the Internet with a toll-free 800 number . The Internet itself is being inundated with businesses signing themselves on . As of March 1 , this year , more than half of 3,400 networks registered for the Internet were private businesses , compared to 29 per cent research institutes and 4 per cent educational centres - 'what is going on now is the equivalent of a gold rush , ' according to Phill Gross , chairman of the Internet Engineering Task Force . 'Commercial companies , new users , the small mom-and-pop outfits - they 're all rushing into this new frontier . ' The task force is a voluntary group that deals with technical problems on the Internet , including an effort to provide more security on the system . The lack of security is itself protection against too much commercial exploitation of the Internet . But as the National Science Foundation's measly Dollars 11.5m subsidy is gradually reduced , the system is a tempting target for commercialisation . For now , businesses that indulge in a cyberspace version of junk mail are being excoriated by other Internet users . The future holds prospects for voice , text and video transmission , a development that will only increase the appeal of the online services . Already the Music Vendor forum foresees transmitting artwork , digital audio files and video on CompuServe . Knecht says that the Music Vendor forum had more than 1,000 log-ons its first day , a feat that indicates the potential for this extra-terrestrial definition of office space . He is leading the way in breaking down the barriers between consumer and business communication . But the rapid changes endanger the uniqueness of a channel pioneered by non-commercial interests . Its fate may be decided all too shortly , as the leading players in worldwide communications weigh in with their investments .