Reveal that you are a television critic and the reaction , as often as not , is : 'Oh you poor thing , you must be awfully busy during Christmas . ' Over the years you learn to nod sadly with a shrug and the hint of a suffering smile which says , because this is what you are expected to say : 'Well yes , it 's not the bed of roses it may seem , Christmas is the TV critic 's busiest season . ' In fact this is a lie . While the general public may use television at Christmas as a way of avoiding the need to talk to Auntie Gertie , thus pushing up the week's per-capita viewing figure to the highest of the year ( more than 33 hours in 1992 ) the critic heaves a sigh of relief and switches off for the duration . What can the critic possibly write about the 17th screening of The Snowman ? The 42nd version of Nine Lessons And Carols ? The 19th repeat of Genevieve ? Well all right , you may say , but it is n't all repeats and old movies - there are only 700 films on over Christmas ( most on the satellite of course : a mere 235 turn up on the BBC , ITV and Channel 4 ) . What about all those 'special ' programmes they make for Christmas ? Most of those are dire and not , in any case , the sort of things a serious critic would ever want to spend time on . Ask a comedy writer to step outside the bounds of his normal 30 minute package and write a 90-minute Christmas special and he ( and his partner , or even she and her partner , though female comedy writers are still rare ) will go to pieces . Can you remember a single Christmas special which did not feel desperately stretched and which was not clearly inferior to the normal weekly episodes ? It is a truism , endlessly repeated by those in the business , that the essentials of comedy are pace and timing . Give the writers three times their usual quota of time and they behave as boxers would if you put them in a 45-foot ring : they do n't know how to use the unaccustomed space . Their rhythm goes , they look weak and lost . All the most interesting parts of television stop for Christmas : original drama series , documentaries , current affairs , even the news programmes are truncated , presumably because of the bizarre belief among broadcasters that 'nothing happens ' when Parliament has risen , and the courts are taking a rest from their onerous five-hour days . Experience proves that the incidence of news events continues and may even increase during the Christmas holidays , but those who run television have never noticed this . On Christmas Day BBC1 reduces its normal news bulletin by 66 per cent , and at ITV they not only do the same , they also slip the programme back to 7.50pm which is , of course , what the ITV chiefs would like to adopt as standard practice , if only the Prime Minister and others would stop making such a fuss . If we are honest about it , Christmas is a period when television , much of which is an undemanding medium at the best of times , slithers down within itself and becomes even more undemanding . Consequently viewers who do not wish to slump on the old green sofa in an alcoholic stupor for three days - or in some homes now anything up to 14 days - are reduced to musical extravaganzas such as The Sorceress with Dame Kiri Te Kanawa ( BBC2 , Christmas Eve ) , the few movies which are genuinely new to television such as BBC1 's box office hit Ghost ( Christmas Day ) , and the occasional tempting oddity such as Nick Park 's new plasticene-animation short The Wrong Trousers ( BBC2 at teatime on Sunday ) . If this downbeat version of Christmas television is accurate , you may say , why all the fuss about the ratings 'war ' ? Why should the broadcasters be so keen to win the battle not so much of the Titans but of the Munchkins ? The answer , an open secret inside the industry , is that only one side really wants to win . That side is the BBC , and because their will to win is so much greater than ITV 's , they almost invariably do win . For ITV , Christmas is a financial paradox : the ratings battle begins at precisely the moment when the buying of time by advertisers goes into vertical decline . Come the evening of Christmas Eve , the public has spent and overspent its Christmas budget , the shops have shut , and the population is preparing to remain behind closed doors for three days . Which commercial broadcaster in his right mind is going to waste his best programmes fighting for viewers at the very time when the advertising bonanza has ended and commercial breaks are reduced to a succession of ads for summer holiday brochures ? What would be the point of holding back Prime Suspect 3 for the Christmas holiday when you could be showing it on December 19 and 20 at the very time when the public , in a panic , is thinking 'Must go out tomorrow and buy some more food/drink/presents for the siege ' ? ITV did , of course , screen Prime Suspect 3 earlier this week , it was packed with commercial breaks which were chock-a-block with Christmas goodies , and when the viewing figures appear in the new year no doubt we shall discover that ITV won the ratings battle exactly when they wanted to . However , their sulky 'Ca n't win , wo n't win ' attitude over the Christmas holiday is surely not going to bring them many friends . Between 6pm on Christmas night and 3am the following morning they are showing four American movies - National Lampoon 's Christmas Vacation , Field Of Dreams , DOA and Airport III ) - a documentary about an American song writer ( Dreaming Of A White Christmas ) a half-hour programme providing 'the latest movie news ' dominated by American items ( Cinema , Cinema , Cinema ) , and that 10-minute news bulletin from ITN . Visitors from Pittsburgh and Peoria should feel very much at home . To describe this as a cynical cop-out would seem to be pitching it a bit high . It is a disgrace , though nothing more than we have come to expect from ITV during 1993 . And the prognosis for ITV in 1994 ? A steady decline . Happy Christmas ]