EFFORTS to resolve the North Korean nuclear issue will take several months of 'painstaking negotiations , ' Mr Han Sung-joo , the South Korean foreign minister , said yesterday . Mr Han cautioned that the process would be complicated because North Korea must hold separate talks with the US , South Korea and the International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) on allowing full nuclear inspections . The US will start talks with North Korea tomorrow in Geneva to persuade Pyongyang to stay within the nuclear non-proliferation treaty ( NPT ) and accept IAEA inspections of two nuclear waste facilities that could determine whether North Korea is processing more plutonium than it has declared . The US has also indicated that progress should be achieved in implementing mutual nuclear inspections between North and South Korea before it is willing to expand relations with Pyongyang . North Korea has recently adopted a conciliatory attitude towards the US in preparation for the talks , including toning down its anti-US rhetoric and yesterday returning the remains of 17 UN soldiers killed during the Korean War . Pyongyang is sending a 'signal to Washington that it is interested in improving relations , ' explained Mr Han . In contrast , US President Bill Clinton during his weekend visit to South Korea appeared to toughen his stance against the North Korean nuclear programme . Earlier he had offered concessions including allowing high-level meetings between US and North Korean officials after Pyongyang threatened in March to withdraw from the NPT . The talks in New York eventually persuaded North Korea to suspend its NPT withdrawal last month . The tougher US approach has the full backing of Seoul , according to Mr Han . 'We recognised that North Korea may have felt insecure and we tried to take measures to allay the unnecessary fears that North Korea may have had , ' he explained about the first round of US-North Korean negotiations . The sharper tone now being adopted was meant to emphasise to North Korea that the nuclear issue 'is a very serious matter and must be resolved ' . The foreign minister denied there were any differences between the US and South Korea on how to deal with the North Korean issue , explaining that Seoul did not favour a more conciliatory approach than Washington . He was 'neither optimistic nor pessimistic about the outcome ' of this week's US-North Korean talks . However Pyongyang had no choice but to accept nuclear inspections because it wanted to avoid UN economic sanctions . ' I have no doubt that sanctions are something North Korea does not want to be faced with , ' Mr Han said , referring to the country 's difficult economic situation .