EUROPE 'S new single aviation market has produced no sudden miracle of lower fares and is unlikely to do so for many months . Although Lufthansa of Germany started selling on January 1 cut-price tickets between a dozen German cities and other EC destinations , a cheap round-trip economy ticket from London to New York still costs less than the cheapest economy return fare on a scheduled airline from London to Rome . If you flew business or standard economy class to Rome , you would have had to pay more than double the New York fare of Pounds 240 . 'Anyone who believes that 1993 heralds a golden new era for the long-suffering European air traveller is living in a fool 's paradise , ' says Sir Michael Bishop , head of British Midland Airways , the UK airline campaigning for more competition in European air transport . In theory at least , European airlines are now free to set their own fares and create a more competitive environment for consumers . Governments retain the power to prevent airlines from overcharging or setting cut-price predatory fares , although new price freedoms and 'open skies ' are supposed to put pressure on airlines to bring down fares , especially for business travellers . Lufthansa has been the first to take advantage of the single market price freedoms by launching a new year cut-price ticket offer , prompting some other carriers to follow suit . But it is unclear whether the move will lead to a sustained US-style fares war in Europe . European business class fares are still among the highest in the world in terms of cost per mile : as much as 73p a mile from London to Paris against a club class fare of 17p a mile from London to Sydney . Even in the single market , financially strapped European carriers are likely to continue to rely on business travellers to subsidise economy seats . A recent study commissioned by British Midland suggests that European business travellers are spending Pounds 600m a year too much on air travel on the 15 busiest routes because of excessive club class fares . The depressed state of the airline industry is also expected to discourage carriers from engaging in fare wars , which have rocked the US airline industry since deregulation 12 years ago and are now raging on the transatlantic market . Competition will also be undermined by obstacles including the lack of take-off and landing slots at busy airports , such as London Heathrow or Frankfurt , and congestion in the air . The big European flag carriers , most still under state control , have also moved quickly to try to stifle competition by absorbing smaller carriers or forging partnerships and equity links with other larger airlines .