MR Nelson Mandela , president of the African National Congress , and President F. W. de Klerk yesterday shared the 1993 Nobel Peace Prize for working to dismantle South Africa 's apartheid regime and for laying the foundations for peace and democracy in the violence-torn country . The five-member Norwegian Nobel Committee said that from their different points of departure , Mr Mandela and Mr de Klerk were being lauded for reaching agreement on the principles for a transition to a new political order based on the tenet of one man , one vote . 'By looking ahead to South African reconciliation instead of back at the deep wounds of the past , they have shown personal integrity and great political courage , ' it said . In an interview with Norwegian radio soon after the award was announced , Mr de Klerk said he was overwhelmed by the decision : 'It 's a great honour and I accept it with great humility . I accept it on behalf of all other leaders who have contributed towards the dynamic process in South Africa . ' He stressed that economic development of South Africa was needed to help end violence there . 'We are glad to be back in the international community and that sanctions have been lifted . We hope that investment can come to South Africa so jobs can be created . ' Mr Mandela described the honour as a 'challenge to us all as co-equal compatriots to so conduct ourselves that those who seek to foster racial and ethnic hatred and war are isolated and cauterised ' . The Nobel committee said South Africa had been the symbol of racially conditioned suppression . 'Mandela 's and de Klerk 's constructive policy of peace and reconciliation also points the way to the peaceful resolution of similar deep- rooted conflicts elsewhere in the world , ' where ethnic disparities cause the bitterest conflicts , it said . The committee said that while previous Nobel laureates Albert Lutuli and Desmond Tutu made important contributions to progress towards racial equality in South Africa , Mr Mandela and Mr de Klerk have taken the process a big step further . Professor Francis Sejersted , chairman of the committee , said the South African duo had bound their political fate to achieving peace . He said the committee 's reasons for yesterday 's decision were similar to those behind the awards to former Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev in 1990 and to Ms Rigoberta Menchu ' Tum , the Guatemalan human rights campaigner , last year . 'Similar political peace processes are also under way in those laureates ' countries , ' he said . The Nobel Peace Prize , named after Mr Alfred Nobel , the Swedish inventor of dynamite , comprises a gold medal , a diploma and a cheque for SKr6.7m ( Pounds 550,000 ) . Prof Sejersted believed Mr Mandela and Mr de Klerk would come to Oslo on December 10 to receive the prize .