EUROPEAN dealers revised down their projections for interest rate cuts in France and Germany yesterday after the latest figures for German M3 monetary growth came in a little higher than had been expected , writes James Blitz . In recent days , Bundesbank officials had led dealers to believe that the figure for M3 monetary growth in August would not be as high as had been anticipated . This was the month when the German central bank engaged in heavy intervention to support ailing currencies in the European exchange rate mechanism , and original estimates had been for an annualised figure well above 8 per cent . Far from calming the market , the Bundesbank 's comments caused a flurry of expectation late last week that the figure would turn out to be very low at around 4.5 per cent to 5.0 per cent . So , when the final figure turned out to be 7.2 per cent , after 7.4 per cent in July , there was some disappointment . There was also disap-pointment after the Bundes-bank again announced a fixed rate repo in this week 's money market operations at 6.70 per cent . There had been hopes for a return to the variable rate , although with call money still well above the discount rate at 6.90 per cent , there might have been a chance of bids coming in higher . Euromark interest rate futures were down on all this news , with the December contract falling 5 basis points to close at 93.92 . French franc interest rate futures fell much more heavily , with the December contract dropping 14 basis points to finish at 93.64 . At this level it is pricing three-month money at the end of the year at 6.34 per cent , compared to yesterday 's cash rate of 7.25 per cent . There probably needs to be official easing in France very soon if December is not to be sold off . In the Japanese interest rate futures market , the 75 basis points cut in the country 's discount rate was greater than expected . The December contract rose 14 basis points to end at 97.51 . Three-month yen cash declined 1/8 percentage point to around 2 9/16 per cent . The sterling market was comparatively quiet . Three-month money closed about 1/16 softer at 5 7/8 per cent . A shortage of Pounds 1.7bn was forecast at the start of the day by the Bank of England , most of which was taken out in the early round of trading .