The presidents of the US and South Korea are expected to make a last-ditch attempt to persuade North Korea to abandon its nuclear weapons programme when they meet in Washington today . In an effort to defuse the mounting tension between North and South Korea , President Bill Clinton and President Kim Young-sam are likely to offer to suspend the joint annual Team Spirit military exercise in South Korea . In return , they will seek a resumption of international inspections of North Korean nuclear facilities and talks on de-nuclearisation of the Korean peninsula . The deal could pave the way to settle a dispute sparked by North Korea's threat to withdraw from the nuclear non-proliferation treaty . If Pyongyang offers proof it has ended its nuclear arms development programme , the US has suggested it might grant diplomatic recognition and provide economic aid . The latest US initiative follows a statement by North Korea that it would consider a package of simultaneous compromises with Washington . Both sides are racing against time . A possible declaration in the next few weeks by the International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) that North Korea has broken nuclear safeguards by refusing to accept inspections could force the UN Security Council to consider economic sanctions on Pyongyang . That might trigger a hostile response by North Korea and lead to a conflict in the most heavily-armed area on the planet . ' A war on the Korean peninsula might last only a month and end in the defeat of North Korea , but the destruction would be unimaginable , ' a western diplomat said . Whether such an apocalyptic event will occur depends on North Korea 's true intentions in provoking the crisis and the west 's response to it . The prime aim of Pyongyang 's nuclear weapons programme seems to be to ensure survival of North Korea and the ruling family of President Kim Il-sung . North Korea is confronting increased problems in the post-cold war world . Its economy has shrunk by an annual 5 per cent in the past three years . Reports persist of disturbances caused by food shortages . Abroad , collapse of the socialist bloc has left the North isolated , as witness the recent 140-1 vote in the UN General Assembly urging Pyongyang to comply with nuclear inspections . The North has lost the support of one key ally , Russia , and relations have cooled with another , China , after Moscow and Beijing set up diplomatic ties with Seoul . Even the North 's conventional military force , although bigger than the South 's , is ageing , while Seoul rapidly modernises its army . It is an insecure North Korea that views nuclear weapons as the ultimate guarantee of its continued existence . 'It 's the last card they have left to play , ' says Mr Adrian Foster-Carter , director of the Leeds University Korea Project . But how Pyongyang plans to use that card is open to question . Some of those who favour a hardline approach to the North Korean nuclear issue argue that Pyongyang may be intent on taking South Korea by force once it completes the development of nuclear weapons . Possession of nuclear missiles aimed at US military bases in Japan might force the US to think twice about supporting Seoul in a conflict . But other analysts believe North Korea would never risk invading South Korea again as it now lacks powerful allies . Instead , Pyongyang is engaged in a high-stakes game of diplomatic poker , using its nuclear programme as a means to win concessions . These would include US diplomatic recognition , which would imply international acceptance for the permanent division of Korea , and western economic aid . Adding to the uncertainty over North Korea 's nuclear programme are varying estimates of how close Pyongyang is to producing a nuclear weapon . US intelligence estimates range from a few months to five years . Whatever North Korea 's nuclear intentions are , the US has based its opposition to Pyongyang 's possession on two main grounds : one , it would deal a blow to efforts to stop nuclear proliferation . North Korea 's acquisition of nuclear weapons , despite being a signatory to the nuclear safeguards treaty , would encourage others to violate the agreement ; two , the US fears a renegade North Korea could provoke a nuclear arms race in north-east Asia by forcing Seoul and Tokyo to follow suit . Pyongyang might also emerge as a supplier of nuclear technology to other anti-western nations . The US has few options to stop North Korea 's nuclear programme . A pre-emptive attack on the North 's Yongbyon nuclear facilities is highly unlikely ; it would almost certainly precipitate an attack on South Korea . Economic sanctions are also questionable . China may veto a sanctions resolution in the UN as it tries to extend its influence in the region by protecting North Korea . The US is urging Beijing to support sanctions if China 's efforts to intercede with the North Koreans fail . Even if sanctions are imposed , they could be ineffective . North Korea's border with China , its chief outside source of oil and food , is porous . Moreover , sanctions could provoke an attack by North Korea . 'Sanctions are regarded as being perilously close to an engagement of war and the North may see no alternative but to fight , ' one diplomat said . For this reason , China , South Korea and Japan are urging the US to be cautious over sanctions . The US so far has pursued a conciliatory approach to solving the nuclear inspection issue . But pressure is growing in Washington for the Clinton administration to adopt a tougher approach if North Korea refuses to accept IAEA inspections soon . 'The Clinton administration is already being criticised for being weak on foreign policy ; to some in Washington the offers to North Korea smack of appeasement . I do n't know if the administration could sell diplomatic recognition to the US public and media even if North Korea accepts full inspections , ' one US official says . If North Korea is engaged in diplomatic brinkmanship , it may have to decide soon whether to accept the present package of US concessions , instead of holding out for more and risking seeing them disappear . Washington and Pyongyang may be seriously seeking a negotiated solution to the dispute , but the situation is still fraught with possibilities for miscalculation , and for conflict .