FIVE new Boeing 747-400s will line up later this year in Taipei 's Chiang Kai Shek airport bearing the colours of the world 's second-largest container shipping group , Evergreen . The jets will fly to a number of international destinations , but a domestic issue lies at the heart of the strategy : China . During 1992 , more than 1.5m Taiwanese visited China , via a third country . If prohibitions on direct transport were lifted , Eva Air 's president , Mr Frank Hsu , estimates that the number of travellers to China could treble immediately . The momentum of tourists and capital already flooding from the Republic of China back to its erstwhile Communist enemy is placing Taiwan 's government under increasing pressure to relax these restrictions on direct links . Economists provisionally estimate that the lifting of the prohibition on direct transport could add at least 1 percentage point to gross national product , from savings on trans-shipment of products via Hong Kong . But , it is gradually becoming apparent that the government is no longer prepared to budge . The government 's own game plan for relations with the People 's Republic is unequivocally stated in its 1991 Guidelines for Unification . The current 'short-term ' phase , is one of 'exchanges and reciprocity ' , as exemplified in 'practical ' bilateral discussions that took place in Singapore last month . The two countries can progress into the phase of 'mutual trust and co-operation ' only if China renounces the use of violence to bring this 'renegade province ' back to the bosom of the motherland and if it recognises Taiwan as a separate political entity . China has refused to give ground on any of these but it has already started putting pressure on Taiwan to recommence the 'three links ' - post , transport and commerce - which are clearly identified with the second phase . Taiwanese President Lee Teng-hui in a press conference yesterday again emphasised the need for mutual trust and recognition before these links are put into effect . With the build-up to the Singapore meeting - the first quasi-official talks to take place between the two sides since the Nationalists ' defeat in 1949 - there had been a growing sense that this process could be accelerated . The pro-business President Lee has recently consolidated his power-base through the appointment of an acolyte as premier , and brokers argued that he would be prepared to push towards direct links in order to attract support from the business community . But the government has started to give the lie to this . Last week , the Securities and Exchange Commission was encouraged to put the brakes on listed companies ' investment in China , prohibiting the raising of capital on the stock market for the purposes of funding projects in China . In addition , a lobby of senior Taiwanese bankers were invited by Beijing to set up branches in the mainland , but this request was turned down by the Taiwanese government . Mr Jason Hu , government spokesman , admitted that holding back on direct links was a political trump card , and China 's insistence on direct links during the Singapore talks has made the value of this card even more apparent . Mr Hu said the business community would have to be patient . 'Most business people understand that they gain nothing in these links , if they lose Taiwan , ' he argued . But patience appears to be a rare commodity . As the costs of land and labour continue to escalate in affluent Taiwan , there has been a flood of investment capital through Hong Kong and into China . Taiwan is now the single largest source of visitors to the British colony , because despite the inefficiencies of investing indirectly , China relocation has become an economic imperative . More than Dollars 7bn ( Pounds 4.5bn ) has been invested across the Taiwan Straits and the focus is beginning to progress beyond basic low-cost assembly plants , despite the continued aggressive stance of Beijing . The Evergreen group is the most notable in preparing a massive transport network with which to cement direct links . Eva Air , which had its inaugural flight just two years ago , is buying 20 aircraft with options on a further eight . Mr Hsu said : 'We would be able to start direct flights within three months of an announcement . We have made some studies and would want to fly to Beijing , Shanghai , Xiamen and Guangzhou . ' He admitted that if the fare structure was attractive , Eva would take aircraft off international routes to help build up its China business . Uniglory , another Evergreen group company , has recently purchased five small container ships in anticipation of feeder services running from the coast of Fujian province down to Evergreen 's container terminal in Kaoshiung . Ironically Mr Y F Chang , Evergreen 's founder and chairman , is an avowed supporter of the opposition Democratic Progressive party , which endorses Taiwanese independence - an event which many still believe would trigger a Chinese invasion . Evergreen 's corporate strategy , however , suggests that for the chairman , business comes before politics . The same may be true for the ruling Kuomintang ( KMT ) party , which is trying to control a flood of investment into China , whilst its own companies take a more conciliatory stance . China Development Corporation , a listed company whose largest single shareholder is the Kuomintang , is currently negotiating a stake in a mainland-controlled satellite project , Apstar-2 . A government-linked joint venture with China in regional telecommunications and television transmission - an area fraught with political sensitivities - could hardly be said to put out the right signals to other local businesses . The investment flows continue to build up , despite officials 's threats to tighten restrictions . By 1997 , links with Hong Kong - which then reverts to China - will , in effect , breach the prohibition on the 'three directs ' , and Eva Air may have secured mainland routes by then . But in the meantime , the Kuomintang looks set to continue its lonely battle against excessive business links with the enemy .