The government is expected to announce tighter voluntary controls on tobacco advertising soon to head off a private member 's bill which would impose an advertising ban . The bill , to be tabled by Mr Kevin Barron , Labour MP for Rother Valley , would ban all cigarette , cigar and pipe tobacco advertising except at the point of sale . The Department of Health confirmed yesterday that tighter voluntary controls being considered for tobacco advertising include : A ban on poster advertising . An end to tobacco advertising in women 's magazines . Removal of tobacconists ' shop front advertising . Larger health warnings on cigarette packs . The Advertising Association , the umbrella group for advertisers as well as practitioners , accused the government of over-reacting . Ms Fionnuala Tennyson , associate director , said said it was 'totally inappropriate to go any further without any real evidence ' that advertising had an effect on tobacco consumption . The Tobacco Advisory Council , the trade body for UK tobacco manufacturers , said advertising stimulated competition between brands , rather than encouraging anyone to smoke . The total tobacco retail market is worth about Pounds 10bn a year and about Pounds 60m is spent by the industry on advertising . Mr Barron , who won third place in a backbench Commons ballot for the right to introduce legislation , yesterday claimed the support of more than 200 MPs of all parties . The government , however , is firmly opposed to legislative controls on tobacco advertising , which ministers believe are less effective than voluntary curbs . This approach was confirmed by Mr Kenneth Clarke , the chancellor , in his Budget speech on Tuesday . Government MPs are not normally given voting instructions on private members ' legislation but the government would have little difficulty in finding procedural ways of killing the bill if it wished . Ash , the anti-smoking lobby group , said yesterday it was concerned that the government would not be able to get the industry to agree to tighter curbs , particularly now that it had , in effect , taken away the threat of legislation . Britain has blocked an attempt by the European Commission to ban advertising by directive , and ministers rejected similar proposals by the Commons health committee earlier this year .