THE US is losing patience with North Korea 's resistance to international inspection of its nuclear facilities , a senior State Department official said yesterday . Ms Lynn Davis , undersecretary of state for international security affairs , told a House of Representatives committee the US was prepared to ask the United Nations Security Council to impose sanctions on North Korea if it continued to resist full inspection by the International Atomic Energy Agency . 'Our patience is running out , and the North Koreans need to know that is our next step , ' Ms Davis told the Foreign Affairs Committee . She did not , however , set any specific deadline by which the US would request sanctions . Sanctions , however , are an extremely sensitive issue because many fear that North Korea might be more likely to attack neighbouring South Korea or other nations if driven into a corner . North Korean officials have said they would consider the imposition of sanctions an aggressive act . Last week , Japan and South Korea warned Mr Les Aspin , US defence secretary , against seeking UN sanctions out of fear that North Korea might undertake a terrorist campaign . Mr Aspin spent two days in South Korea discussing the northern threat with President Kim Young-sam . The US has 35,000 troops there . President Bill Clinton said on Sunday that North Korea ' can not be allowed to build a nuclear bomb ' , but did not discuss specific actions the US might undertake . Ms Davis told the committee that in the past North Korea 'could have produced weapons grade material sufficient to produce one or two nuclear weapons , ' but added she was confident that Pyongyang was not making atomic bombs now . Preventing North Korea from producing nuclear weapons was among the most important of the administration 's goals , Ms Davis said . She was hopeful China would not veto a Security Council request for sanctions . 'They share our goals and we hope that they would work with us on the Security Council . The US is willing to pursue non-proliferation goals rigorously even when they may cause friction ' . In addition to fears about nuclear weapon development , the US is concerned about possession of conventional arms . Ms Davis grouped North Korea along with Iran , Iraq and Libya as nations of particular concern . She said that North Korea could become one of the countries to be monitored closely by a new international safeguard organisation .