MR EDOUARD BALLADUR , the French prime minister , yesterday urged industry to minimise job cuts and to avoid using redundancies as the 'easy solution ' to difficult economic conditions . His appeal came the day after the announcement or confirmation of about 13,000 job cuts by French companies , described by the press as 'Black Wednesday ' . The series of redundancies , principally affecting public sector groups , represents a blow to the government 's attempts to curb unemployment growth . The unemployment rate , now at about 11.7 per cent , is expected to reach 12.5 per cent by the end of the year , according to Insee , the national statistics office . Mr Balladur expressed concern at growing redundancies in French industry and said that ' a modern and human economy can not have as its sole objective the obstinate search for financial efficiency ' . He said industry must also take account of 'the social dimension ' of employment decisions . An official at the prime minister 's office said Mr Balladur 's comments were directed mainly at public sector companies . But the prime minister also said private companies should only cut jobs 'as a last resort ' . The single biggest announcement of job losses this week came from Air France , the lossmaking state-owned airline . The company said its difficult financial situation led to the decision to cut 4,000 jobs , almost 10 per cent of its workforce , by the end of next year . Snecma , the state-owned maker of aircraft engines , announced it would cut the equivalent of 775 full time jobs in 1994 . Bull , the computer group , confirmed an earlier decision to shed 6,000 jobs , including 2,850 in France , by the end of next year , while Thomson-CSF , the defence electronics group , confirmed plans for 1,700 job losses in the same period . The wave of redundancies is not confined to the public sector , nor is it likely to end with this week 's announcements . Peugeot-Citroen , the private sector car manufacturer , is expected by industry observers to announce more than 4,000 job cuts next week in response to the depressed European car market . Company officials declined to comment yesterday . Mr Balladur indicated yesterday that the government would shortly approve capital injections for some state-owned groups . But he declined to specify the amounts or the recipients . The government is constrained in providing funds for state industry because of its growing budget deficit , forecast at FFr317bn ( Pounds 36bn ) this year .