Forgive the inhabitants of Beverly Hills this weekend if they indulge in bouts of self-admiration even greater than normal . This week has brought evidence that the summer of 1993 could be shaping up as a good one for the US film industry , despite early flops which had some critics writing it off as a 'summer of stinkers ' . The biggest hit seems certain to be Jurassic Park , directed by Steven Spielberg , of Jaws and ET fame . It has been breaking industry records since it opened . As every human susceptible to the Hollywood publicity machine must now know , it is a tale of dinosaurs brought back from extinction , which proceed to run amok in a tropical theme park . The stars of the film are the extraordinarily life-like reptiles , created by computer graphics , which provide viewers with an entirely new dimension in cinematic terror . But the past 10 days have also seen the release to big audiences ( but mixed reviews ) of two more movies with substantial hit potential : Sleepless in Seattle , a romantic comedy featuring Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan ; and The Firm starring Tom Cruise , a thriller about a crooked law firm based on the best-seller by John Grisham . The summer season is one of the two the most important times of the year for the US movie industry , which releases its most popular films now or at Christmas , when people tend to have more leisure . The three and a half months of summer generate about 40 per cent of annual US box office revenues . So far this summer US ticket sales are up 7 per cent on 1992 , according to Mr John Krier , president of Exhibitor Relations , a film industry consultancy , who reckons that a host of films only now being released will provide a 'second wave ' of momentum . 'It 's going to be a big summer , ' he says , 'probably a record breaker , passing 1989 . ' That summer was the industry 's best , with US box office receipts soaring well over Dollars 2bn , thanks to such movies as Batman , Lethal Weapon 2 , Honey I Shrunk the Kids , and When Harry Met Sally . If the predictions are right , there will be a much-needed psychological boost to an industry which has seen the volume of US ticket sales edge down in each of the past three calendar years , and is suffering from a decline in the numbers of 13- to 25-year-old Americans - traditionally the most avid movie-goers . However , the upturn will not necessarily put the industry in better financial health . For the number of films being released this summer is unusually large - about 60 , up by a third from last year , which far outstrips any likely improvement in revenues . One of the biggest winners among the top Hollywood studios appears to be Universal , part of the MCA entertainment group , which is in turn owned by the Japanese electronics company , Matsushita . Universal is behind Jurassic Park , which smashed through Dollars 100m in box office receipts just nine days after its release , beating the record of 10 days set by Batman in 1989 . Industry observers reckon the film could challenge Spielberg 's own record for the best-selling movie of all-time , set by ET , which grossed Dollars 399m in the US between 1983 and 1985 . However , allowing for ticket price inflation , Jurassic Park would need to top Dollars 650m genuinely to beat ET , and that seems unlikely . Jurassic Park certainly needs to be a monster hit , for Universal reputedly invested well over Dollars 100m in making and then heavily marketing the movie , with an estimated Dollars 25m spent on creating the dinosaurs alone . Columbia , part of Japan 's Sony group , is thought to have poured about Dollars 100m into the early summer 's other hugely promoted film , Last Action Hero , starring Arnold Schwarzenegger , the lantern-jawed muscle man who habitually terminates villains with extreme violence in blockbuster action movies . Schwarzenegger received an up-front free of Dollars 15m . However , the film has not been a great hit . Observers reckon it may gross only Dollars 50m to Dollars 60m in the US and will have to rely on overseas sales to recoup its costs . Unlike a traditional action movie , Last Action Hero aims for a degree of sophistication , gets confused and falls between all sorts of stools . It contains a complex film within the film and numerous gags about classic movies , including a walk-on role for Sir Ian McKellen , playing the figure of Death from Ingmar Bergman 's Seventh Seal , let loose in present-day Manhattan . But Sony , Matsushita 's long-time rival , has other potential winners in its hand - and it needs them badly , since its US entertainment industry profits are now playing a big role in offsetting the poor state of the Japanese electronics market . Its Tri-Star studio is responsible for Sleepless in Seattle , which was directed by Nora Ephron , author of the 1989 hit When Sally Met Harry . And later this month Columbia will release a new Clint Eastwood film , In the Line of Fire , which deals with an attempt to assassinate the US president . Perhaps more than any other big studio , Paramount needs a string of hits to bolster the lacklustre profits record of its parent , Paramount Communications . It had a strong performer earlier this year with Indecent Proposal , featuring Robert Redford , but then stumbled at the start of the summer with Sliver , starring Sharon Stone , Hollywood 's latest sex symbol . Critics panned the film . Now , however , it may have a blockbuster on its hands with The Firm , which grossed Dollars 7.2m on its first night . Neither Walt Disney nor Warner Brothers , part of the Time Warner media empire , seems to have anything as strong , though Disney 's What 's Love Got To Do With It - a biography of rock star Tina Turner - is playing well , compensating for the company 's flop with the comedy Super Mario Brothers . But while the summer is young , dinosaurs seem set to rule the film world .