THE GOVERNMENT 'S pro-mised review of the nuclear power industry , scheduled for later this year , is likely to focus on a narrow set of economic issues rather than broad questions of energy policy . This is against the wishes of the nuclear industry , which believes a wider review would be more likely to result in approval for more nuclear power stations . The review is crucial to the prospects for nuclear power in the UK . At present only one nuclear station , Sizewell B , is being built . The review will decide what happens next . Ministers at the Department of Trade and Industry are still considering the terms of reference for the review but the indications are they feel that energy policy received a thorough airing in last winter 's coal crisis . A narrow review would focus on the economics of nuclear power , particularly the prospects for financing nuclear power stations from the private sector and , eventually , privatising the state-owned nuclear utilities , Nuclear Electric and Scottish Nuclear . The nuclear industry fears , however , that such a review might conclude that nuclear power can not attract private-sector finance for the next stage of its development , and that plans for new nuclear power stations should be put on hold . Nuclear Electric does not expect to make an unsubsidised profit before 1996 . Although Scottish Electric reported a Pounds 66m profit last week , it is not ready for privatisation . The economics of nuclear power are also bound up in the controversial issues of decommissioning costs and waste management which the nuclear industry would rather avoid . Much will depend on whether the government gives the go-ahead to the Thorp nuclear waste processing plant at Sellafield . Nuclear industry executives say they hope the review will take account of the industry 's longer-term prospects . A larger nuclear industry would help reduce atmospheric emissions at a time when EC regulations are being tightened , and would strengthen the diversity of fuel sources . They stress the export prospects for nuclear construction and decommissioning technology if the UK has a flourishing nuclear power sector .