In the aftermath of the first world war there could hardly have been a worse name for a company operating in France than Bosch . The word boche , which means rascal , had become a term of abuse for Germans : yet the French bought Robert Bosch engines and pumps regardless . Equally , Rentokil is about as bad a name as you could think of for a company trying to make it in healthcare and in tropical plants . Yet that name is here to stay . On this page last week chief executive Clive Thompson explained that he had shunned the advice of image consultants to rename his company . Rentokil , he said , has a reputation that transcends any association with hired assassins and is too entrenched now to discard . So what 's in a name ? Does it matter what a company calls itself ? 'If you have a bad name you can still have a successful company , ' says Wally Olins , who has made a handsome living out of dreaming up new names for companies . 'But it is easier for a company if it has a name that helps it . ' However good or bad its name , a company needs a powerful reason to change once it has taken root . English China Clays , like many other long-established businesses , found its name had been overtaken by events . As the company was no longer mainly in England , nor mainly in china clays , it decided to drop the words and use initials instead . However , as the outside world persisted in calling it 'ECC ( formerly English China Clays ) ' , the company eventually gave up and reverted to its full title . According to Adrian Day , a senior consultant at Siegel and Gale , the communications consultancy , companies wanting a new name no longer reach automatically for initials . Not only have most combinations of two or three letters already been taken , but companies are discovering that establishing a new identity around meaningless initials can be expensive . 'It takes a lot of time and expenditure to make them mean something , ' he says . Even when the new name is a real word , it may be a struggle to get it accepted . When Woolworths became Kingfisher , shareholders at its annual meeting became so agitated the company had to call in the police . The management , however , felt that Woolworths had become a misleading name as it owned more businesses than just that chain . Not all companies think it matters if they have the same name as one of their brands - indeed , some think it an advantage . Consolidated Foods , the US consumer goods company , changed its name to Sara Lee in the hope that the goodwill associated with that brand would rub off on the whole company . The most pressing reason for a new name is that the old one has become sullied . Thus Ratners , the UK high-street jeweller , has recently become Signet ; Control Securities , the property and leisure company whose former chairman and chief executive has been charged in connection with the BCCI case , has started a new life as Ascot Holdings . New names come in all shapes and sizes ; they also come at all prices . At one extreme British Telecom is estimated to have spent some Pounds 50m letting Wolff Olins , the consultancy , transform it into BT . At the other Control Securities and Ratners spent little more than the cost of reprinting their stationery . The name Signet simply occurred to a Ratners manager one day ; he put it to his colleagues , they liked it and that was that . Control Securities ' new name was even simpler - Ascot was the name of a shell company it owned . By contrast , 25 people and a computer working flat out at image consultancy Interbrand for 14 weeks were required to come up with a new name for ICI's pharmaceuticals offshoot . The name Zeneca might seem scant reward for all that effort . Yet Interbrand 's Paul Stobart explains that choosing a name is more difficult than it might appear ; nearly all the obvious ones have already been taken . Moreover , the more markets a company is in , and the more countries , the more difficult it is to find an available name . A list of 1,000 possibles was checked against six trademark groups in more than 30 countries . Then the foreign language experts had to eliminate anything that was rude or indiscreet in a foreign language . The next stage was to present the company with a shortlist . 'People get very emotional about names . ICI was professional about it , but some companies can be a real nightmare , ' says Stobart . ICI decided on Zeneca because the Zen part has associations with Zenith . To give the name extra significance , the company explains that a little cross was added to the Z to make it resemble the alchemy symbol meaning to solve . Such clever twists may be lost on the average consumer of pharmaceutical products , to whom one computer-generated name may be as good as any other . Yet experts can distinguish between names just as winetasters can pick out different vintages . 'The way the name appears , the sound and texture of it when spoken , the symmetry of it , are all important . The word needs to have a good look and appeal , with nothing that is ugly or difficult to pronounce , ' says Stobart . In choosing a name such as Zeneca , ICI has gone for the industry norm . In pharmaceuticals unusual names , such as Glaxo , are common . In other industries different rules apply . Advertising agencies and most professional firms call themselves after their partners - the more names the better . Hairdressers can not resist jokes : Headmasters , Curl up and Dye , Crops and Bobbers and so on . Puns are also acceptable for opticians - For Eyes is a market leader - and bathroom shops ; but greengrocers and butchers stick to sensible names like High Class Butchers . Says Olins : 'Most people in any industry do what the peer group dictates . ' Anyone who breaks out will not be on their own for long . In the computer industry , IBM set the standard , and was followed by lookalike names such as ICL . Then came Apple , which was deliberately daring to be different . It was followed by Apricot and an orchard of computer companies . 'Why are fruits like computers ? ' asks Olins . 'Because someone did it once . ' Despite all the effort that goes into getting a name right , many of the best names have been created by accident . One of Day 's favourites is Virgin Atlantic . The lesson is perhaps that anyone trying to name an airline should think of a good name for an alternative record company , and take it from there .