THE US Justice Department 's decision to pursue an anti-trust investigation of Microsoft makes it increasingly likely that the world 's largest computer software company will face charges of illegal anti-competitive business practices . Justice officials disclosed on Friday they had initiated an inquiry after a preliminary review of evidence gathered by the Federal Trade Commission in its three-year anti-trust probe of the company . Simultaneously , the FTC said it had voted to close its investigation of Microsoft after deadlocking - in February and again in July - on whether to take action against the company . Mr Donald Clark , FTC secretary , warned the company that the commission 's decision should 'not to be construed as a determination that a violation may not have occurred ' . 'The Justice Department 's involvement represents a much more serious threat to Microsoft than it faced from the FTC , ' said Wendy Goldman Rohm , author of a book soon to be published on Microsoft 's anti-trust battle . The FTC had narrowed its case against Microsoft to issues unlikely to have a significant financial pact on the company . But the Justice Department is expected to broaden the case , raising the possibility of tougher sanctions and even , perhaps , an order to break up the company . Microsoft has denied any wrongdoing and insists it will be vindicated . But the case raises serious concerns for the Clinton administration , which has identified high-tech industries as the 'engine for economic growth ' . Microsoft is a prime example of the enterprise the administration aims to encourage : a world market leader that has demonstrated US competitiveness . The company recently reported its 18th consecutive year of growth in revenues and profits . Over the past five years Microsoft 's sales have grown by an average 46 per cent a year to reach Dollars 3.75bn ( Pounds 2.48bn ) in fiscal 1993 , ending June 30 . Microsoft dominates the market for personal computer operating systems , programs that control the basic functions of a PC . Microsoft 's MS-DOS is used on more than 90 per cent of PCs . Microsoft 's 'Windows ' program , which provides 'point and click ' control for PCs , is also a runaway success with over 30m copies in use . Competitors claim Microsoft 's success has come at their expense , alleging the company abuses its dominant role in the PC operating system software market to exclude or disadvantage competitors . But a recent study suggests Microsoft has been the driving force behind software industry growth . The study , by Telecommunications Research Group , concludes almost 500 companies have been formed in the US to create PC software to work with Microsoft 's Windows , with more than 17,300 jobs created . Microsoft Windows has created an industry of new companies that together have annual revenues of about Dollars 280m , and more than Dollars 1.3bn in incremental revenues for established software firms , the study concludes . Yet the vast majority of these companies are very small . The typical software firm employs just six people and generates about Dollars 560,000 in annual revenues , according to TRG . All are beholden to Microsoft , reknowned as an aggressive competitor . Microsoft 's role in the industry is frequently compared to the power that IBM wielded in the computer market of the 1970s and early 1980s . Just as in its heyday IBM set industry standards , dominated markets and instilled 'fear , uncertainty and doubt ' into competitors , so today Microsoft can call the shots in the PC industry . Ironically , such comparisons have taken on a new dimension . Just as IBM battled through 13 years of Justice Department anti-trust investigation , from 1969 to 1982 , so 'Big Green ' , as Microsoft is nicknamed in the computer industry , now faces similar scrutiny . Although the Justice Department ultimately dropped its anti-trust case against IBM , the investigation had a serious impact which many analysts believe contributed to its inability to keep pace with changes in the market and to its current problems . The government collected 760m documents from IBM during its 13-year anti-trust investigation . 'IBM 's top executives were afraid to put anything down on paper for fear the government would subpoena the document . Lawyers , who were developing a stranglehold on the business , decided what could be said at meetings , ' says Mr Paul Carroll in Big Blues , The Unmaking of IBM , to be published next month . Microsoft faces a period of intense scrutiny that seems certain to consume the attention of its senior management . The anti-trust investigation could prove to be a serious distraction for a company renowned for its tight focus . Nothing would please Microsoft 's competitors more . ' I 've developed a view that being successful is not a fun thing sometimes , ' Mr Bill Gates , chairman and chief executive , said recently . 'There is just a phenomenon where people do n't like a company as successful as ours . '