BOND TRADERS who use commodity prices to predict inflation-rate changes have had to pick their indicators carefully this year . Industrial commodity prices have for the most part fallen , while futures prices for consumer goods such as cereals , gold and softs have tended to rise . At the same time , US government indices that measure price movements have exhibited a curious tendency to follow seasonal variations - a trend belies the Bureau of Labour Statistics ' practice of adjusting prices for seasonal factors . If , as forecast , the BLS reports today that consumer prices were flat in June , it will bring the consumer price index ( CPI ) back to a year-over-year rate close to 3 per cent - little changed from last year . That is good news for businesses and the US Federal Reserve Board , which aim for price stability . However , it is a puzzle to fixed-income traders who shorted bonds when inflation took an alarming swing upwards in the first quarter . Mr John Lipsky , chief economist for Salomon Brothers , says CPI data have risen in the first four months of every year since 1989 , without consistently following through for the rest of the year . The June CPI , if it comes in on forecast , will smooth the first quarter's seasonal changes . 'For now , outlook for energy prices is good , demand is not too strong , and the dollar is helpings us out overseas . That gives a pretty steady outlook for inflation , ' Mr Lipsky said . The calm inflation forecast seems to be borne out by commodity prices . While the Commodity Research Bureau 's closely watched index of futures prices reached 20-month highs last week , it did so on the strength of soyabean and precious metals prices . Those commodities carry very little weight in either the CPI or the producer price index . A better indicator of price inflation is the CRB 's index of spot industrial commodities , heavily weighted towards scrap metals and materials like rubber and tin . That index , in contrast to the futures index , is near its lowest levels of the year . A third , the Goldman Sachs commodity index , is in a similar position . The two indices are moving in parallel because industrial metals and energy prices have been locked together this year . Economists say it will take an upward turn in the broader indexes to predict a shift in inflation expectations .