PRIVATE CONTRACTORS are winning an increasing share of council contracts for refuse collection and street cleaning , a survey published today of contracting out in waste management services shows . The Institute of Public Finance , a research arm of the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy , says the survey found that private companies have won more than two thirds of the refuse-collection contracts put out to tender by councils since January last year , against competition from council workforces . Private contractors now operate contracts worth almost Pounds 150m a year in total - 24 per cent of the market . The shift towards using private contractors looks set to continue , the survey found . Contracts for refuse collection worth Pounds 170m will be going out to tender over the next 18 months as the contracts in the first generation of tendering come up for renewal . Conservative councils are much more likely to award contracts to the private sector than Labour-controlled councils . More than half the waste-management work of private contractors comes from Conservative-controlled councils , with only 7 per cent from Labour authorities . The survey covers 97 per cent of the refuse collection and street-cleaning work which must be put out to tender . It is the first of a series analysing compulsory competitive tendering sector by sector . Of the 457 refuse-collection contracts in the survey , 117 went to private companies , including six to local authority management buyouts . The survey shows that the proportion of new contracts won by the private sector has been steadily rising , from less than a quarter in the earliest days of compulsory tendering to 68 per cent for contracts since January last year . The private sector has been less successful in winning street-cleaning contracts , which 288 local authorities put out to tender separately from refuse collection . Less than a fifth have gone to private contractors , and these are worth just 15 per cent of the Pounds 210m-a-year market . Since January last year , the private sector has won a 28 per cent share of street-cleaning contracts put out to tender . Another Pounds 85m of contracts is due to be retendered over the next 18 months . sector total . CCT and the Private Sector , Volume 1 : Waste Management . IPF , PO Box 4 , Croydon CR9 1AT . Pounds 100 ( Pounds 50 to local authorities ) .