A STRATEGY to promote commodity futures trading by developing countries to hedge against price fluctuations is being elaborated by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development . The aim is to maximise the use of commodity exchanges by buyers and sellers in third world nations to manage risk . According to Unctad , developing country governments and companies are generally unfamiliar with the real advantages and disadvantages of risk management and with ways of limiting abuse . Moreover , commodity exporters in developing countries often do not have the necessary expertise or internal accounting and monitoring systems to operate effectively in commodity futures markets . An expert group that met in Geneva last week has come up with a series of proposals for tackling these and other obstacles . They include easier access to credit for users of risk management instruments , help for companies to develop suitable internal control systems and measures to minimise the impact of exchange controls on the legitimate use of commodity futures markets . This interest in commodity exchanges is something of a departure for Unctad , which in the past has been the principal sponsor of price-stabilising commodity pacts . However , over the past few years virtually all these accords have collapsed or abandoned market-intervention mechanisms in the wake of steadily sliding prices . Meanwhile , the pattern of commodities trading has been changing . The group of experts notes that liberalisation and privatisation in developing and former communist countries has increased the role of trading houses , especially for hedging soft commodities . Hedging against price changes on commodity futures markets can not influence long-term trends but can help protect commodity-dependent developing countries from unexpected price fluctuations . Among the specific recommendations of the experts , which they want Unctad to take up , are : Action by commodity exchanges and their members to encourage the involvement of buyers and sellers in developing countries ; Government help to develop local warehouses that can issue warehouse receipts and so provide security for credit lines to finance margin calls on domestic exchanges ; Other government action to improve the supply of credit for risk management , such as creating suitable institutions or liberalising access to foreign exchange ; Direct assistance for companies to develop proper internal control systems , in co-operation with commodity exchanges ; Guidelines to minimise the impact of capital controls on the ability of domestic state and private companies to participate in overseas risk management markets .