NEARLY six out of 10 UK executives would be better off after next April by handing back their company cars in exchange for extra pay and a mileage allowance to run their own cars , according to what is claimed to be the largest survey of the UK company cars sector . Almost one third would gain by more than Pounds 750 a year , according to employee benefits specialist Stoy Benefit Consulting . The London-based group received detailed responses from 5,400 companies , operating a combined total of 189,000 cars , in reaching its conclusions . The study , compiled over many months , was commissioned by Volkswagen/Audi in an attempt to determine the detailed impact of a new Inland Revenue taxation regime for company cars which comes into effect next April . It assumes an executive receives an extra payment equivalent to what it costs the company to run the car . The cost to the company would remain the same . The new Revenue regime will tax the private benefit to employees of company cars according to simple sliding scales based on new cars ' list prices . It will replace a long-standing but complex price and engine capacity banding taxation system . However , Stoy Benefit 's managing director , Mr Brian Friedman , made clear yesterday that the study was not recommending a mass exodus by executives from company cars . The other 43 per cent would benefit from retaining their company cars - nearly one quarter of these also by Pounds 750 a year or more . 'While the company car may not be universally as tax effective as it once was , there are still many for whom it remains so , ' according to Mr Friedman . 'The government 's policy towards the taxing of company cars may therefore be said to have been effective in producing the much more balanced position revealed by the survey . ' The survey was aimed wholly at executives , paying tax at the higher rate on cars which traditionally , if often inaccurately , have been regarded as 'perks ' . They account for around one tenth of all company cars . There is no simple formula for individuals to calculate whether they will be better or worse off by giving up their company car . Which category they will fit depends on individuals ' annual business mileage , individual taxation position and other factors . In general those most likely to benefit from handing back their company cars are currently driving executive cars priced at close to the current Pounds 19,250 price threshold for higher taxation . 'Driving Around the Boardroom Table ' , from Stoy Benefit Consulting , 8 Baker Street , London W1M 1DA . Pounds 95 .