The drugs industry 's view of Alzheimer 's disease has been transformed during the past two decades , from an obscure and untreatable form of dementia to a favourite target for research . Alzheimer 's disease probably causes more human distress , for victims and their friends and families , than any other single disease of modern industrial society . It is now known to cause 70 per cent of all cases of dementia , turning healthy brain cells irreversibly into a characteristic pattern of decaying tangles and sticky plaques of protein . At least 10m people worldwide suffer from Alzheimer 's disease . The symptoms include progressive memory loss , inability to carry out simple everyday tasks , breakdown of personality and , after a few years , death . Alice Zilonka , aged 73 , memorably described the early stage to the UK Alzheimer 's Disease Society : 'My brain is like a dark thunderstorm . ' Unfortunately there is no prospect of lightening her personal darkness . But there is now a glimmer of scientific optimism about Alzheimer 's . Researchers have begun to understand the biological basis of the disease , in particular the microscopic 'senile plaques ' and 'neurofibrilary tangles ' that are the main sign of deterioration in sufferers ' brains at post-mortem examinations . The plaques result from the aggregation of 'beta-amyloid protein ' molecules around the decaying nerve terminals of brain cells . These molecules are fragments of a much larger parent protein , known as amyloid precursor protein ( APP ) . Healthy cells produce small quantities of APP ( though its normal function is unknown ) but in excess it may lead to toxic accumulations of beta-amyloid . Several different factors can trigger the Alzheimer 's process . Researchers at St Mary 's Hospital Medical School in London have recently discovered that some rare inherited forms of the disease are due to mutations in the gene on chromosome 21 which determines the structure of APP . But inherited genetic defects probably account for only 10 to 15 per cent of Alzheimer 's cases . Many more are caused by environmental factors triggering excessive APP production in injured nerve cells . One possible factor that used to be the subject of much interest - but is now rather discredited - is intake of aluminium . There is more evidence linking severe head injury to the development of Alzheimer 's . Viruses may also be involved . But most of the risk factors are unknown . Clues may come from epidemiological studies which show that Alzheimer 's is extremely rare among old people in tropical Africa but common in Afro-Americans who have grown up in the US . Reports of the recent advances in Alzheimer 's research - fuelled in the US by enthusiastic press releases from young biotechnology companies working on drugs for dementia - have aroused what many experts believe is an unrealistic public expectation that there will soon be an effective treatment for the disease . ' I ca n't see anything within 10 years that is really going to make an impact on Alzheimer 's , ' says Geoffrey Dunbar , director of SmithKline Beecham's central nervous system therapeutic unit . 'Yes , there 's a lot of interest in APP but we 're a long way away ( from an actual drug ) even in that area . ' Michael Traub , director of clinical neuroscience at Merck 's UK laboratory , looks even further ahead . 'Someone might come up with a fundamental understanding of Alzheimer 's disease within the next 20 years but that does n't mean there 'll be a drug in 20 years , ' he says . The types of treatment now undergoing clinical trials can do no more than relieve temporarily some of the symptoms , particularly memory loss . The most popular approach is to improve the function of neurotransmitters , the chemical switches by which cells pass messages . The main target is acetylcholine ( a neurotransmitter essential for memory ) in which the Alzheimer 's brain is severely deficient . A class of medicines called aminoacridines achieve this by blocking the enzyme that destroys acetylcholine in the brain . Two such drugs , velnacrine ( Mentane ) from Hoechst of Germany and tacrine ( Cognex ) from Warner-Lambert of the US , are awaiting approval from regulatory authorities on both sides of the Atlantic . Several more are at an earlier stage of development . But they are controversial because they only work in a minority of patients - improving memory slightly for a year or two - and they can cause side-effects such as liver damage . In addition , several existing drugs that help other disorders of the nervous system are being tested for their effect on Alzheimer 's . An example is selegiline ( Eldepryl ) from Sandoz of Switzerland , which slows the progression of Parkinson 's disease by reducing the damage done to brain cells by oxygen-free radicals . However 'the holy grail of Alzheimer 's research must be to prevent beta-amyloid deposition , ' says Jim Edwardson , director of the MRC Neurochemical Pathology Unit in Newcastle upon Tyne . 'Many pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies are investing considerable money and skill , trying to develop drugs that would prevent amyloid deposition . ' Several companies are concentrating on the enzymes involved in amyloid metabolism , seeking a way to block the destructive formation of beta-amyloid from APP . But they are a long way from clinical trials of candidate drugs . A complementary avenue of research is to use natural chemicals known as nerve growth factors to regenerate brain cells damaged by Alzheimer 's . Then , in the distant future , it might be possible to stop the amyloid deposition process at an early stage and to repair any damage that had taken place . If effective drugs are developed for Alzheimer 's disease , it will be all the more necessary to have accurate tests to diagnose the disease in the early stages , so that treatment can begin before serious symptoms appear . At present there are no simple diagnostic tests to distinguish even advanced Alzheimer 's from other forms of dementia with different causes ( such as multi-infarct dementia , the next most common form in elderly patients , in which a series of small strokes interrupts the blood supply to tiny areas of the brain ) . Only a post-mortem examination of the brain - such as Alois Alzheimer carried out for his original description of the disease in 1907 - will tell definitely whether someone suffered from Alzheimer 's . But two approaches to a diagnostic test for living patients are giving promising results in research . Brain scans will soon be accurate enough to show the changes characteristic of the disease . For example , the Oxford Project to Investigate Memory and Ageing , based at the Radcliffe Infirmary , is using X-ray computed tomography ( CT scanning ) to reveal Alzheimer's-related shrinkage in part of the brain that is important in memory , the medial temporal lobe . And Nicholas Fox , an Alzheimer 's Disease Society fellow at St Mary 's Hospital Medical School , plans to detect early degenerative changes in the brain through magnetic resonance imaging . Biochemical markers may be used to diagnose the disease and follow its progress . One candidate is the level of APP in spinal fluid , lower in Alzheimer 's patients ( possibly because it is being deposited as beta-amyloid protein in the brain ) . Sibia , a Californian biotechnology company , is developing an antibody-based test based on this observation . Any company developing an effective drug for Alzheimer 's would create a new world market potentially worth several billion dollars a year . But it would save at least as much as that by enabling old people to continue living at home , instead of becoming dependent on the health care system or on family members who assume what can become a crushing physical and emotional burden by caring for them . Above all , an Alzheimer 's cure would end the agony for millions of people who end their lives with minds like dark thunderstorms . A realistic assessment suggests that people who are now young adults can look forward to an old age free of Alzheimer 's . The series will continue next month with a look at treatments for the menopause . -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- - NUMBERS OF PEOPLE AGED : -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- - Year 40-64 65-79 80+ Total 40+ -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- - 1991 14,670 196,280 387,600 598,550 2001 16,049 194,748 449,200 659,997 2011 17,977 198,740 487,200 703,917 2021 17,261 240,480 495,000 752,741 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- - Note : at least 70 per cent of dementia cases are Alzheimer 's Disease -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- - Source : Alzheimer 's Disease Society from OPCS figures -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -