A CAMPAIGN launched yesterday for the release of Ms Aung San Suu Kyi , the detained Burmese opposition leader , has rekindled a fierce debate in Asia about human rights and the merits of Asian countries intervening in their neighbours ' affairs . Eight Nobel Peace Prize winners , after being refused entry to Burma , came to neighbouring Thailand to start the campaign for their fellow laureate . Ms Suu Kyi won the prize in 1991 and has been held under house arrest for over three years by Rangoon 's military junta . The campaign has won support from the Clinton administration and prizewinners unable to come to Thailand , such as Mother Teresa and Mr Mikhail Gorbachev , former Soviet president . But China issued two warnings to Thailand in an unsuccessful attempt to prevent the Dalai Lama , the exiled Tibetan spiritual leader , from taking part . China invaded Tibet in 1950 . The campaign to release Ms Suu Kyi marks a break from the traditional South-East Asian policy of 'constructive engagement ' with Burma . Thailand's armed forces , enjoying lucrative logging concessions there , have criticised the Thai government for hosting a visit they fear will damage Bangkok's relations with both Beijing and Rangoon . Gen Vimol Wongwanich , army commander , said such campaigns should be held in the US , not Thailand . 'It 's like inviting the battle into our house , ' he said . The Thai army banned the screening of an interview with the Dalai Lama on one of the TV stations it controls . Previous Thai governments have bowed to Chinese pressure over the Dalai Lama , refusing him a visa in 1987 and 1990 . But Mr Chuan Leekpai , the civilian prime minister elected on a liberal ticket last year , has allowed all the Nobel laureates into the country . Both he and King Bhumipol are scheduled to meet them . In Bangkok yesterday , the Dalai Lama avoided overt criticism of China or Thailand , but implicitly chided them for supplying weapons and aid to the Burmese junta and suggested an arms embargo would be a good idea . 'In Thailand and everywhere , the value of human rights and of democracy is increasing , ' he declared . 'In a new era , everyone is concerned about democracy , human rights and freedom . ' The visiting laureates , including Archbishop Desmond Tutu of South Africa , northern Ireland peace campaigners Ms Betty Williams and Ms Mairead Maguire , and an Amnesty International representative , are to meet Burmese refugees today . At the weekend some of them will go to Geneva to make a submission to the UN Human Rights Commission .