THE North Korean guards at the truce village of Panmunjom are wearing steel helmets rather than their normal military caps . The country has sealed its borders to foreign visitors , while a dusk-to-dawn blackout has been declared for the capital Pyongyang . Even as North Korea goes on a 'semi-war ' footing in response to military exercises in South Korea , the sabre it is rattling is large but in danger of becoming blunt . Although North Korea outnumbers South Korea in troops and weapons , its advantage is being eroded as more and better weapons are acquired by the South , which has doubled defence spending since 1986 as its economy rapidly expands . The military balance between the two Koreas has reached the point where neither side could gain a decisive victory on its own , although South Korea has the advantage of being able to call on the support of the US military if war should ever break out . North Korea is believed to be developing a nuclear weapon as a relatively cheap alternative to counter the South 's growing military ability . Less publicised have been claims that North Korea is also developing an extensive arsenal of biological and chemical weapons , which Seoul believes Pyongyang wants to use as a strategic bargaining chip in negotiations with the South . North Korea has the fourth largest armed forces in the world , with 1.3m men under arms , according to the International Institute for Strategic Studies . With a population of 22m , this makes North Korea the most militarised country in the world . The South Korean military is almost half its size with 633,000 soldiers out of a population of 43m . North Korea also enjoys a clear quantitative advantage in weaponry against the South , with a two-to-one ratio in tanks , artillery , and combat aircraft and the exclusive possession of attack submarines , the third largest fleet in Asia . North Korea has built up an extensive arms industry in the past 20 years . It can produce most of its armoured equipment , naval surface vessels and submarines , while it has developed an indigenous version of the medium-range Scud missile . Weapons have become one of North Korea 's main exports , particularly Scuds to Syria and Iran , although it is estimated that Pyongyang suffers an overall arms trade deficit . But its greatest weakness lies in its combat aircraft and other sophisticated military equipment . Two-thirds of its jet fighters date from the Korean War era and it depended on the former Soviet Union for the supply of high-performance fighters . But relations have cooled between Pyongyang and Moscow in the post-Cold War period . Russian President Boris Yeltsin announced last November that Moscow would halt arms shipments to North Korea , shutting off the supply of advanced MiG-29 fighters that Pyongyang was just beginning to acquire . North Korea 's pursuit of a self-sufficient defence structure has placed an enormous burden on the economy . As much as 30 per cent of gross national product is devoted to defence against 5 per cent in South Korea . Growing economic problems , including difficulties in importing oil due to a lack of hard currency , are also believed to be affecting North Korea'smilitary readiness . The US estimates that training time for North Korean pilots is decreasing because of the fuel shortage . There are also eyewitness reports that North Korea is using soldiers and military vehicles for civil construction projects due to economic problems . A lack of hard currency will severely curb the purchase of military equipment and even spare parts from abroad , although North Korea might be able to get some supplies from the Middle East in exchange for Scud missiles . Nonetheless , North Korea remains a serious threat to the South . The US estimates that 65 per cent of North Korean forces are stationed along the demilitarised zone ( DMZ ) and could launch an attack without much warning . Although the US has based its military planning on the premise that North Korea can support a war using its own resources for up to three months , independent analysts believe that Pyongyang could face difficulties much earlier due to its inefficient industrial base and poor transport infrastructure . North Korea would probably follow the strategy it used in 1950 , when it last attacked South Korea , by initially aiming to capture Seoul , just 35 miles from the DMZ , according to the US Defense Department . But in most other respects , circumstances have changed greatly since 1950 . North Korea then was tempted to invade because the South was suffering from domestic political turmoil , its army was weak and inexperienced , and the US had no troops in the country . Moreover , North Korea has the support of the Soviet Union and China . None of those conditions exist today . See Editorial Comment -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- HOW KOREAN FORCES LINE UP -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- North South Korea Korea -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- Armed forces 1.32m 633,000 Tanks 3,500 1,800 Other armoured vehicles 4,340 2,500 Artillery 6,800 4,500 Multiple rocket launchers 2,400 140 Mortars 9,000 5,300 Combat aircraft 732 403 Attack helicopters 50 65 Submarines 26 4 Frigates & destroyers 3 38 Patrol craft 379 81 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- Source : IISS Military Balance 1992-93 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --