THE worldwide telephone network has been described as the biggest machine ever built , and has certainly brought about some of the biggest changes in human existence this century . It now has a rapidly growing rival : the worldwide Internet . The Internet is not a single network ; it is the biggest collection of computer networks ever linked together . It connects around a million machines and new subscribers are joining at a rate of 100,000 per month - a growth of ten per cent each month . Like the phone network , Internet gives global connectivity : access to any other machine connected to the system . This gives the equivalent of a facsimile connection direct to any other user . But computers in contact can offer further services , from electronic mail onwards . Despite this , few people have heard of the Internet , and business users are only just beginning to exploit it as a resource . The first commercial services in the UK began in 1992 , and have grown rapidly . Pipex , run by Unipalm of Cambridge , with a service that costs from Pounds 2,000 to Pounds 10,000 per year , is taking Pounds 100,000 each month in subscription fees and has 78 subscribers . Each Pipex subscriber gets a connection to their office and can link their whole internal network to the worldwide Internet . One of Internet 's great advantages over other services such as X25 is the fact that Internet protocols are the same as those used on many local area networks . So far , Pipex subscribers include such companies as Barclays Bank , Eagle Star , Guardian Royal Exchange , Powergen , the British Library , and City firms such as Trygg-Hansa . Many people in these companies use Internet without realising it . On a smaller scale , Demon Internet Services offers a simpler connection for home users and smaller businesses , at a cost of Pounds 10 a month . The service started as a sideline in June 1992 , when software house Demon Systems decided to spread the cost of its own Internet connection . 'We planned to get 200 to 400 people , ' says Grahame Davis of Demon Internet Services . 'We 've now got 750 people , and that is rising at about 100 per month . ' If this continues the service will have to be turned into a fully-fledged line of business , or sold off . Other ways into the Internet include gateways available from several bulletin boards such as Compulink Information Exchange ( CIX ) and mail services such as Compuserve . Most of these will forward electronic mail , but some give access to other Internet services . Internet has been hidden from view because it was developed for academic traffic and first boomed in linking research workers . It is also based on de facto standard protocols which are out of favour in official circles . The Internet began with the US Department of Defense 's ARPAnet , which began with four machines in 1969 . During the 1970s , ARPAnet was linked with other networks and developed its own standard protocols , called TCP/IP . Other protocols including the OSI standards were used on the nets , but only experimentally . More and more networks joined the Internet during the 1980s . Europe was slowest to adopt the service , possibly due to official pressure to adopt services which use the rival OSI protocols . Strangely , the Internet was developed with US public money , despite the fact that North America also has an OSI policy . Much of the funding came indirectly , through researchers' salaries . In 1992 , control of the Internet and its protocols passed from a self-appointed committee to a new body called the Internet Society , in a bid to make the Internet more acceptable in official circles . The Society also plans to raise development funds for the Internet . In the meantime , the growth of the Internet may bring its own problems . As its exponential growth continues , it will have to create new 'addresses ' - the electronic 'telephone numbers ' assigned to each system on the network . With telephone numbers , this is done by adding extra digits , as in London's recent change from 01 to 071/081 , and the extra 1 soon to appear in all UK phone numbers . On a network , the solution is similar . However , there are technical and political dimensions to the situation . The Internet protocols are old , and a change of addressing would be a good time to introduce new versions of them . This has sparked an argument over which protocols to use , and how to structure addresses . The Internet Society is taking the matter seriously , but some Internet promoters believe it has been blown out of proportion . 'The issue has become an opportunity for some unscrupulous people to sow doubt about the Internet , ' says Mr Dawe . 'The Internet is adapting to the continued tidal wave of users . The problem has been well forecast and there will be minimal disruption caused . ' OSI protocols have been suggested , notably by Richard des Jardins , a lecturer and consultant based in Washington DC , and one of the original architects of OSI . He believes that governments and the phone companies will create a parallel OSI-based Internet : 'Why let a second Internet get started , even if the TCP/IP Internet is dominant ? The only interests that would be served would be the hardliners on both sides and the vendors who make money on unnecessary duality . ' If the Internet adopted the OSI protocols alongside its own , it would be a basis for an 'international dial-tone , ' claims Dr DesJardins . 'The alternative is the internet equivalent of one half of the world using one electrical power standard , and the other half using a different and incompatible standard , and trying to plug into each other . ' The Internet community do not see it that way : they object that the protocols are too 'heavyweight . ' They are not being run over users ' internal networks , so the solution would destroy the homogeneity currently available . And , says Peter Dawe of Unipalm , the system is too complex : 'OSI also allows too many addresses - enough to address every single particle in the universe , individually . ' In the short-term , the Internet has come up with a system to redistribute the existing addresses and get more use from them . In the next two years , the Internet Society will choose a new protocol ( OSI or not ) , which will run alongside the existing Internet - 'the two networks will run concurrently and transparently , ' says Mr Dawe . 'Over time , systems will phase over to the new one . ' Whatever the solution to the technical issues , the Internet seems set to keep growing . It is a demonstration of what can be achieved with a simple practical approach to networking , and an example of how to use government money in a well-controlled project . 'The Internet is going ballistic , ' says Dan Lynch , president of Interop , which organises events for the Internet community . 'It can not survive technically much longer without some strong central ( worldwide ) operational collective that sorts out routing and directory service issues . I have hoped that the 'phone companies ' of the world would figure out how great an opportunity they have to provide these services but , thus far , they have squandered their lead . But someone will get it together . There are just too many trillions of marks to be made . ' Cix is on tel 081 390 8446 . Unipalm/Pipex is on 0223 420002 . Demon Internet Services is on 081 349 0063 .