rather than jobs and houses - are giving grounds for optimism in the newspaper advertising market , which is generally flat in spite of hopes of a consumer-led recovery from recession . After two disastrous years which saw national press advertising revenue fall by almost a quarter , the industry is wary of predicting a false dawn - not least because the differing fortunes of Britain 's 11 daily newspapers and the types of advertising they are winning reflect the different impact the recovery is having on advertising sectors . Although overall advertising revenues remain dramatically down , the signs are that some titles and sectors are showing a glimmer of recovery . In the past three months advertising revenue at the Daily Mail , which has the largest volume of display advertising , has been 12 per cent higher than during the same period last year . At The Daily Telegraph , the quality paper with the most display advertising , revenue for April and May has been 23 per cent and 11 per cent higher , year on year . Mr Len Sanderson , advertising director of the Daily Telegraph , said : ' I am still cautious , but we have had some encouraging months . ' It will take several months of growth before he is confident that these 'green shoots' are genuine . The caution seems wise , given the erratic nature of the industry's performance in the past year . The Times said that colour advertising had grown by 30 per cent last month , but this had been offset by a fall in black and white advertising . Advertising revenues at the Financial Times have swung between months , with April 's figures fractionally up on the previous year 's , but May 's 9 per cent lower . These fluctuations are only natural in an industry which has never been an entirely reliable economic barometer . Advertising revenues in April last year were particularly low because of the general election . Mr Harold Lind , a media consultant , said : 'Advertising is a cyclical business . The normal expectation is that television moves first , followed by the lower end of display advertising , then feeding into the classified advertising and recruitment last of all . ' He believes that the 3 per cent growth in television advertising expenditure last year indicates a trend for the press this year . Mr Sanderson said the Telegraph newspapers had taken their main growth from three sectors : a 20 per cent growth in travel advertising , a spate of car promotions at the start of the year , and a steady expansion of financial products advertising . Classified advertisments , which draw heavily on the recruitment and property market , had remained weak . At The Guardian , which has 43 per cent of market share for recruitment advertisements , volume fell 9 per cent in April . Few advertising directors are predicting much expansion in the next months - or any real end to the heavy discounting that means most newspapers have been receiving revenues 35 per cent lower than their official rate-card figures in the past two years . Ms Caroline Midmore , media manager at advertising agency Young and Rubicam said : 'Until we get newspaper rates rising again you certainly ca n't really say we 're out of the recession . '