THE government may privatise London 's Docklands Light Railway by paying the private sector to take it over . Government advisers are studying the move as one of the most likely options for getting the loss-making railway into private ownership . Built in the 1980s for Pounds 77m , the Docklands Light Railway is being extended and upgraded at a cost of Pounds 800m to increase capacity and improve reliability . Earlier this month , the Department of the Environment appointed the consultancy arm of Ernst & Young , the accountancy firm , to draw up a list of options for privatising the line within the lifetime of this parliament . The government is keen to press ahead with the plan because it wants the private sector to build a Pounds 130m extension of the Docklands Light Railway across the Thames to Lewisham in south-east London . A straightforward sale or stock-market flotation of the railway is ruled out by the losses it makes , currently more than five times its Pounds 3m annual revenues . But Ernst & Young believes the private sector could be offered a 'dowry ' to take the railway off the government 's hands . This could stir up a controversy similar to the one that accompanied the government 's recent disposal of the Property Services Agency 's projects division to Tarmac , the construction group , with payments or guarantees worth about Pounds 100m . Another option would be to franchise the operation of the railway to the company wanting the smallest subsidy to run it . But this could prove less attractive than an outright sale because the government would remain the owner . The railway 's performance , once notoriously unreliable , has improved sharply in the past few months under a new management team headed by Sir Peter Levene , former head of defence procurement at the Ministry of Defence . Last week , Sir Peter announced that the railway was to pay Brown & Root , the US engineering group , Pounds 30m over the next three years to get the railway running smoothly and cut its costs . Mr Eric Anstey , Ernst & Young 's director of privatisation and utilities services , said the railway could become profitable next decade if the property market recovered and the Lewisham extension was built . Fast track to efficiency , Page 14