NORWEGIAN salmon farmers , blamed in Britain and Ireland for driving down the price of salmon by flooding the market , have ended their talks with Scottish and Irish salmon farmers on creating a network of producer organisations aimed at controlling production . Their move is in retaliation for attempts by Scottish and Irish farmers to obtain EC sanctions against Norway . Yesterday the Norwegian farmers urged their government to implement measures to curb over-production and called on other salmon-producing countries to limit output . The UK government is believed to be on the point of making a formal request to the European Commission to impose limits on imports of Norwegian salmon into the EC . Salmon prices have fallen drastically in the past few weeks to levels last seen in 1991 , when the EC temporarily imposed a minimum price on imported Norwegian salmon . Norway , which had forecast output of 120,000 tonnes this year compared with 140,000 tonnes last year , is set to produce 170,000 tonnes . The surge is due to a sharp reduction in losses from disease . The Norwegian fish farmers ' association is urging its government to introduce an immediate limit on the weight of salmon that may be taken from licensed salmon cages . Most Norwegian farmers have decided not to feed their fish for seven of the last nine weeks of this year , curbing growth and reducing projected output by 15,000 tonnes . Yesterday the Norwegian association pointed out that salmon output is set to grow faster in Scotland and Ireland than in Norway . An EC report says that Scottish output will rise 27 per cent to 46,000 tonnes and Irish output by 23 per cent to 12,000 tonnes compared with the Norwegian growth rate of 20 per cent . The Norwegian farmers ' termination of discussions on setting up producer organisations brought an angry reaction from the Scottish Salmon Growers Association . Mr Jim Payne , the chairman , said it showed that Norwegian farmers 'have no intention of finding practical and sensible solutions to the severe disruption of the EC market ' . He called on the EC to place an immediate limit on salmon imports from Norway .