BURMA is supposed to be poor and oppressed , but you would have trouble believing it at the Dynasty . Recently opened on the roof of a concrete office block , Rangoon 's most fashionable restaurant and night-club is seething with noisy revellers and new money . Not content with spending the equivalent of a government minister 's monthly salary on an indifferent Chinese meal ( the menu includes the delightful but mysterious Hot and Sour Mutton Fighting Ball ) , the Dynasty 's nouveaux riches diners cheerfully flaunt their remaining banknotes and stuff them into the hands of the gyrating female singers on stage . Mandalay , 350 miles to the north , looks even richer . Imported Japanese cars cruise the streets ; shops are full of colour televisions , hi-fi systems , fake Ray-Ban sunglasses from Thailand , fancy watches and torch-clock-radios ; the market stalls are groaning with toys and textiles from India and China . Neighbouring China is the key to Burma 's new veneer of affluence . For the past four years the generals in the Burmese military junta known as the State Law and Order Restoration Council ( Slorc ) have gradually freed the economy from government control , tolerating the black market , liberalising trade with China and giving free rein to the ethnic Chinese entrepreneurs who dominate business in Burma as in the rest of south-east Asia . The Slorc has also struck deals with the warlike tribes on the frontier . The chief architect of Mandalay 's free-wheeling economic policy is General Tun Kyi , who until recently was the region 's all-powerful military commander . Even the fiercest opponents of military rule admire his achievements . Mandalay , after all , has long been regarded more as a sleepy repository of Burmese culture than as a business hub . 'Tun Kyi is the godfather of Mandalay , ' says one Burmese businessman . 'If the city needs an electric generator he has it imported from China and then calls in the merchants and tells them to pay their share . ' In return , of course , the government turns a blind eye to the more dubious business practices of the merchants . 'The point is , it works , ' says the businessman . The free trade boom has spawned a generation of flashy black marketeers ; they smoke imported 555 cigarettes and drink Changlee beer brewed in the Chinese border province of Yunnan or Heineken shipped from Singapore ; they boast of their ability to buy police chiefs and immigration officers . One such free trader explained how he exported gems and jade to China in exchange for Chinese cassette players masquerading as Japanese brand-name products . Mandalay , he declared with not a little hyperbole , 'will be like Hong Kong in three years ' . At first glance it looks as though everyone is profiting from the boom . The citizens of Mandalay say Gen Tun Kyi has repaired the market and beautified the town ; the Yunnanese have found a short and convenient trade route to the sea , and China is investing in the repair and construction of Burmese roads and bridges . The Burmese junta , isolated by the west because of its miserable human rights record and its failure to release Ms Aung San Suu Kyi , the detained opposition leader who won the 1991 Nobel Peace Prize , has found a powerful friend in China . Chinese arms salesmen are among those who frequent the bars of Rangoon . But prosperity and the fragile peace on the border have come at a price . Guerrillas of the Wa and Kokang hill tribes , who are closely related to the Yunnanese over the Chinese border , have stopped fighting the Rangoon government , but only on the understanding that they are allowed to carry weapons and trade in opium from their strongholds in the Golden Triangle . China is worried about the spread of heroin addiction on its territory , while the inhabitants of central Burma are appalled by the boorish way in which some of the Wa and the Kokang flaunt their money in restaurants and nightclubs , and resentful of the increasing influence of China and the prosperous ethnic Chinese business community . Since a great fire in Mandalay a decade ago , the ethnic Chinese are said to have bought up the entire town centre with the exception of one small hotel and one shop , and traders say Chinese nationals are buying Burmese identity cards at the border . The Slorc , mindful of the Burmese nationalism to which it constantly pays lip service , has recently sought to moderate the spread of Chinese influence and to exert more control over the border trade . Gen Tun Kyi has been recalled to Rangoon , ostensibly to become trade minister , but actually , diplomats believe , because his military colleagues feared he was becoming too powerful in his Mandalay fiefdom . Gen Tun Kyi and his Chinese friends , however , seem to be holding their own . Although he has been theoretically replaced as military commander of the central region , he is still occasionally referred to as the commander by the official press . And in the karaoke bars of Rangoon , they are singing songs in Chinese .