The recent sale by Chrysler , one of the Big Three US carmakers , of its final 2.7 per cent stake in Japan 's Mitsubishi Motors ended an equity link that spanned more than two decades . By coincidence , on the same day , the US Court of International Trade ruled against a charge brought by US carmakers that Japanese manufacturers were dumping mini-vans in the US market . The relationship between US and Japanese carmakers has always been as much coloured by politics as ruled by business interests . In the past , the wrangling has centred on the US car market , with US makers calling on politicians to curb the Japanese onslaught on their home territory . But now the focus of political and business interest has been shifting from the US to Japan . A complex web of relationships has grown up between the Big Three and their Japanese rivals . These gave US manufacturers smaller , fuel-efficient cars and introduced them to Japanese-style manufacturing methods , while allowing Japanese car companies a direct route into the US market . The Japanese market was never a focus of these alliances - in 1992 imported cars took only a 4.1 per cent share . But changes in the political and business environment have wrought a shift in roles . Now Japanese car executives sense a greater interest among US manufacturers in penetrating the Japanese market , and worry that US companies might be serious about using their corporate links to expand their share . 'Ford is now serious about entering the Japanese market , ' says Mr Yoshihiro Wada , president of Mazda . Although the US company has had a dealer network of 300 stores for more than 10 years , which Mazda set up to sell Ford cars , Ford was not particularly enthusiastic about selling to the Japanese market , Mr Wada says . That has changed . Ford recently announced that it would start supplying the Japanese market with right-hand drive models , including the best-selling Taurus , from next year . The US company is also setting up a technical centre in Tokyo to help increase sales of its auto parts to Japanese carmakers . General Motors , meanwhile , has been pushing Toyota to sell GM cars through its dealer network . In April , the US company said the two had agreed in principle to manufacture a car in the US for the Japanese market , with Toyota handling the distribution . The Japanese company says it is still considering the proposal . Many Japanese car companies acknowledge a debt to the US industry in helping them realise their global ambitions . 'It is questionable whether Mitsubishi would have grown into the company it now is without the tie-up with Chrysler , ' says Mr Taizo Yokoyama , managing director of Mitsubishi Motors which has been selling about 40 per cent of its cars in the US through Chrysler 's dealers . Nissan says it was able to develop the Quest multi-purpose car because of its tie-up with Ford . Both companies wanted a new multi-purpose vehicle but independent development would have been too costly , says Mr Junji Shibata , general manager of Nissan 's European and North American operations group . Japanese manufacturers have had to dissociate business interests from the political pressures . For example , Ford , which has had a 24.5 per cent stake in Mazda , joined GM and Chrysler in calling for anti-dumping duties on Japanese mini-vans , including Mazda 's MPV Wagon . However , Mr Wada describes Ford as acting from political necessity , not from a desire to cause Mazda difficulties . 'They are speaking on a political level , ' he says . But as US companies step up their efforts to enter the Japanese market , the sacrifices Japanese carmakers may have to make are overshadowing the advantages they see in their links with US companies . While the Japanese makers say they are willing to help US competitors in their home market , they emphasise the need for clear business incentives for such co-operation . 'We are considering selling Chrysler cars through our dealers , ' says Mitsubishi 's Mr Yokoyama , 'but it depends on how competitive Chrysler 's cars will be in Japan . ' If they can do what the Japanese did in the US and provide domestic manufacturers with cars that they lack , the possibilities for partnerships would increase , Mr Yokoyama suggests . Chrysler , for example , is riding high on a Japanese craze for four-wheel drive cars and provides Honda with its Jeep Cherokee . Meanwhile , with the yen 's appreciation , buying US-made parts or finished products may actually make good business sense for Japanese manufacturers . But the consensus is that US carmakers still have some way to go in meeting the needs of Japan 's demanding consumers . Ford 's enthusiasm about the Japanese market 'does not mean it will have a car that will do well in Japan this year or even next year ' , Mr Wada says . With the US domestic car market in one of its worst post-war slumps and protectionist calls hampering their advance overseas , Japanese carmakers must be hoping their US partners prove to be slower students in the Japanese market than they were many years ago in the US .