When Professor Li Yin ing , one of China 's most influential economists , advised people this week to buy gold h e was doing no more than preaching to the converted . The World Gold Council estimates that since China lifted a ban on the sale of gold jewellery in 1984 increases in gold consumption have averaged 20 per cent a year . Given traditional Chinese affection for gold as decoration and as a hedge against bad times this revived appetite for the precious metal is hardly surprising , although the strength of demand has caught the industry offguard . Gold is so embedded in Chinese consciousness that it ranks first in popular mythology among five sacred elements fundamental to people 's existence together with wind , fire , water and earth . Indeed , the Chinese ideograms for 'metal ' and 'gold ' are identical . Mr Liu Shanen , director of research at China 's Gold Bureau in Beijing , says simply that gold is money . 'To many Chinese gold never loses its value , unlike paper money . It 's also money one can save and pass on to one's descendants . ' A 'Gold Acquisition Study ' conducted last year by the WGC in China 's three main cities found that on average one in five people in Shanghai and Guangzhou bought gold jewellery in 1993 , followed by one in seven in Beijing . Average per head gold consumption among 1.17bn Chinese was Dollars 42 in 1993 , or approximately 0.2 grams per head . Overall gold ownership levels , that is numbers of people buying gold , were up about 5 per cent last year against 1992 . But mainland Chinese gold consumption per head still lags far behind Hong Kong and Taiwan whose citizens purchase on average 10 grams each a year . Such is the obsession with gold these days , that when young women get together they talk about little else but gold jewellery . 'If you 're a young woman without gold jewellery you 'll be looked down upon , ' said one observer . China 's Gold Bureau reports that gold consumption - the bulk is used in jewellery manufacture - grew from 150 tonnes in 1991 to 250 tonnes in 1992 , compared with annual production from China 's own mines of about 100 tonnes . Gold purchases are expected to exceed 400 tonnes a year within the next few years . This would make China the world 's biggest consumer ahead of India and the United States . 'Greater China ' - China , Taiwan and Hong Kong - is already the biggest consumer , absorbing about about 500 tonnes of gold , or a third of western mine production in 1992 . Prof Li 's advice to Chinese to buy gold as a form of saving , and more importantly his recommendation that a gold exchange be established , is certain to attract attention in China where a vigorous debate is in progress about ways in which to rationalise and enliven the country 's gold market . A professor of economics at prestigious Beijing University and prolific writer in the local press , Prof Li is also a member of the standing committee of the National People 's Congress , China 's parliament . Writing in the China Gold Daily , he noted that allowing people to own gold in the form of coins or ingots - gold purchases are restricted to jewellery -would be a means of channelling savings away from short-term consumer spending thus easing pressures on prices . Other benefits of the establishment of a gold exchange were that it would help enliven flagging production , counter smuggling of gold abroad , generate tax revenues and contribute generally to the creation of a gold 'industry' in China . Debate about the establishment of a gold exchange has intensified recently since China 's state monopoly over gold began to crumble with mines selling produce on a booming black market energised by surging demand for gold jewellery . State purchases of gold were down by 40 per cent in 1993 compared with 1992 , in spite of a doubling from September 1 of the purchase price to Yn2,986 ( UDollars 343 ) a troy ounce . That price has not budged since and has remained at about 10 per cent below the world market . With China in the grip of inflation - the cost of living increased by nearly 24 per cent in December - there would be lively demand among consumers for gold as a traditional hedge . The People 's Bank seems reluctant , however , to yield its gold trading monopoly . In the meantime , organisations like the WGC , representing the world 's major mining companies , are certain to redouble their efforts to promote gold's allure in a potential market almost beyond imagination . WGC plans to spend Dollars 3m this year on promotion .