The skies are darkening for first-class air travel . Dutch carrier KLM and Northwest Airlines of the US have become the latest airlines to abolish first class cabins in favour of upgraded business ones on long-haul flights . Flagging customer demand , prompted in part by the economic downturn but also by the upgraded facilities being introduced in the business class sector , have led nearly all the international airlines to review their first class operations in the past two years . Not all that many have survived . Luxury travel has been increasingly passed over by cost-conscious travellers , with many big companies ordering their staff to book cheaper seats as the recession has taken hold . The empty rows in first class have prompted many airlines to create a middle class , and within that tier further differentiation , by refurbishing their existing business facilities . The effect has been a downward ratchet with many former first class travellers unlikely to return , and a generation of prospective customers satisfied in the cheaper business tier . For many airlines , a 5 per cent full paying passenger load has become the norm in first class , with the remaining seats filled by travelling airline crew or by upgrading business class passengers . With the quality gap closing between the middle and top tiers , the hefty chasm between the respective fares looks all the more glaring . A first class ticket between Chicago and Glasgow will cost in the region of Pounds 4,500 , whereas a business class fare comes in at around Pounds 2,500 , with economy at about Pounds 900 . However , the move away from first class travel is not simply a recent one . The recession has accentuated a trend begun in the 1980s when attempts to identify business travellers through a new range of branded products began to pay dividend for airlines . As the range of brands proliferated , so too did the fragmentation of the market , with first class pushed into an ever smaller niche . The first casualty were short-haul flights , with passengers rejecting the luxuries and cost of first class for regional journeys . Last year , Swissair became the last of the big airlines to offer a cheaper alternative to its short-haul first class travel . But it was the recession which sounded the death knell for first class . With airlines plunging into losses throughout the world , the luxury services proved the most costly to keep running and consequently the ones to receive the severest cuts . 'There was hardly any demand , ' says KLM . 'Business travellers want the luxuries of first class but at a business class fare . That 's what we're going to give them . ' KLM and its US partner Northwest Airlines are abolishing their first class tier and will offer passengers a choice between economy and a premium service called world business class , an upgraded version of the old business class service . The main feature of the new service will be increased leg room . The only airlines offering more room to business class passengers will be those that have already abolished first class travel - Virgin Atlantic of the UK and Continental Airlines of the US . British Airways is one of the few airlines to maintain a significant presence in first class , although ironically it was the first to close down its short-haul capacity . Mr Mike Batt , BA 's marketing director , believes the problem for most airlines is three-fold . 'An airline has to maintain a good load factor to make first class economical , and for that it needs a good route network . Few airlines have got the presence . 'Secondly , you need a strong branded product which customers can trust for integrity and consistency . And most of all , you have to be able to deliver that product . ' For BA , integrity means few upgrades from business class . 'Upgrading devalues the product , ' says Mr Batt . So what do customers get for first class not available on other airlines' premium brands ? The lines of differentiation are getting increasingly blurred . Executive lounges , extended leg room , wider chairs and personal video are all offered in different measure by the premium services - and at a cheaper price . Mr Batt admits that first class is matched in many regards by other premium services , but argues that the 'total travel experience ' offered by the doyen of air services is worth the extra expense . 'The first class traveller is someone who , because he is travelling a lot , needs more than anyone to relax while he is doing it . If we can deliver a busy executive overnight to a meeting the next day in a refreshed and healthy state ready to do business , then first class travel is a wholly justifiable business expense . ' First class makes up around 4 per cent of British Airways ' revenue . And Mr Batt believes that the move by other airlines away from the brand will draw other passengers over to BA . 'There is a small but significant band of regular travellers who are loyal to first class and do not want to fly anything else . ' A typical BA 747 will contain around 300 economy class seats , 72-88 club class and 18 or so first class . Other airlines with first class on their 747s are likely to offer far fewer seats . Even so , they have been finding few takers and special deals proliferate , such as free second tickets for spouses and discounts on future flights . Furthermore , plans being drawn up for the new generation of 777 aircraft make no allowances for first class cabins . But BA intends to keep its first class product at the forefront of executive travel . Later this year it plans to introduce its first aircraft to allow first class passengers to send faxes , operate computers , receive E-mail and make outgoing telephone calls . 'All our research indicates that our customers do not want incoming calls , ' says Mr Batt . However , even bullish BA admits the future for first class is not guaranteed . 'If the niche got too small , then we would have to look at our options , ' says Mr Batt . 'You have to be responsive and we will change with the market . '