South Korean president Kim Young-sam yesterday placed the country 's military forces on alert against a possible attack by North Korea as international pressure intensified on that country to allow nuclear inspections . Mr Warren Christopher , US secretary of state , said diplomacy had 'reached a critical point ' , but Chinese officials warned that sanctions or other moves against North Korea would only increase tension on the Korean peninsula . The South Korean armed forces were put on alert as President Kim prepared to leave for Japan and China tomorrow . He is expected to ask Beijing to persuade Pyongyang to accept unhindered inspections from the International Atomic Energy Agency . A North Korean radio broadcast accused the US of making a 'grave threat ' by agreeing to deploy Patriot missiles in South Korea . The US says the deployment , agreed this week , is 'purely defensive ' . Mr Han Sung-joo , South Korean foreign minister , said the 'door is still open ' to direct negotiations with North Korea . He said if the United Nations Security Council imposes economic sanctions , they will be introduced gradually to give Pyongyang time to reverse its decision . Mr Christopher said he expected the UN Security Council to consider a resolution calling on North Korea to allow the completion of inspections . He said : 'We 've made it clear to North Korea that it must become a responsible member of the international community or that community will have no option but to pursue other options . ' The first UN resolution , however , is likely to contain only an indirect threat of sanctions , as it is unlikely that China would approve sanctions against its ally . Mr Li Peng , the Chinese premier , warned in Beijing yesterday that North Korea should not be put under extreme pressure . Differences within South Korea emerged as the opposition Democratic party cautioned against the military measures and urged the government to seek continued dialogue with Pyongyang . Mr James Woolsey , director of the Central Intelligence Agency , repeated his agency 's estimate that North Korea had at least enough nuclear material to make one bomb , although it was not clear if it had assembled a bomb . ' A range of countries around the world are proliferation problems , but North Korea is in a league of its own . It is , in many respects , the pre-eminent proliferator , ' Mr Woolsey said . N Korea miscalculates in row with South , Page 6