The backlash against out-of-town retailing developments gained momentum yesterday with the publication of a report by the Commons environment committee calling for stricter controls on new shopping centres and superstores . The report , Shopping Centres And Their Future , said previous development policies had allowed too many superstores and large retail centres to be built on sites that were 'inappropriate on environmental , heritage and social grounds ' . The fabric of many town centres had suffered . Mr Barry Field , Tory MP for Isle of Wight and the committee 's chairman , said : 'We believe that it is now time to reverse this trend , and to require developers to demonstrate that their proposals for new stores will not harm the vitality and viability of town centres . ' The report is the latest challenge to the retail trade , much of whose growth in the past decade has been outside town centres . It is also a vindication for Mr John Gummer , environment secretary , who has made stemming the flow of retailing away from town centres and towards out-of-town areas one of his main objectives . The Department of the Environment has published two guidance notes for local authorities in the past 18 months calling for town-centre development to be favoured . Last week the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution proposed doubling petrol tax and halving spending on new roads . Yesterday 's report suggested the government 's planning guidance should be strengthened to include ' a presumption that superstores are best located in or on the edge of town centres unless there are very strong indications to the contrary ' . The report also said that a proper study should be made of the effects of out-of-town developments on town centres , and that no applications for superstores or large developments around market towns should be considered unless they included a full study of their possible effects on existing retailing in the town . The environment committee echoed the royal commission in calling for increased investment in public transport , and said local authorities , the department and retailers should work together to revitalise town centres . Mr Gummer gave the report an enthusiastic welcome and promised to 'respond in detail ' in the new year . 'When I first proposed that we had to ensure town centres remained the focus of town life , particularly shopping , the pundits proclaimed that the public were not with us , ' he said . 'Now we have widespread support from parliament and the public . '