Germany 's money supply growth continued to decelerate in September , but not by enough to encourage hopes of further interest rate cuts by the Bundesbank over the next few weeks . The closely watched M3 monetary indicator rose at an annualised rate of 7.7 per cent last month . Some economists had expected it to show a more marked slowdown , now that the distortions which caused it to grow more sharply earlier this year have been ironed out . The latest M3 figure 'will reduce market hopes for a further rate cut , ' said Mr Stephen King , economist at James Capel in London . 'With relatively high levels of capacity utilisation and strong export and investment growth , there is no real case for rates to be reduced again in the current cycle . ' The Bundesbank last reduced rates in May by half a percentage point , bringing the discount rate down to 4.5 per cent and the Lombard rate to 6 per cent . This helped move money out of short-term deposits ( included in M3 ) and into longer term funds . Recently , Bundesbank directors have made clear they see no immediate case for further interest rate reductions , especially with the strong economic revival . Mr Hans Tietmeyer , bank president , said this week the bank wanted to keep money market rates stable in the face of international volatility . The next Bundesbank council meeting is on Thursday . The bank said the introduction of money market funds into Germany had had some impact on the slower M3 trend but this should not be exaggerated . About DM5bn ( Pounds 2bn ) flowed into foreign-based money market funds in August and DM3bn in September ; a further DM1.2bn went into German-registered funds . Not all of this came from assets in the M3 definition , however . Some came from abroad and some was switched from bond holdings by investors nervous about long-term interest rate trends . 'M3 would have grown somewhat more strongly without money market funds , but the difference can not be specified from information provided by the Bundesbank , ' said Mr Richard Reid , an economist with UBS , the Swiss bank . He , too , thought M3 had not slowed enough to prompt a rate cut at the next two fortnightly council meetings .