US president Bill Clinton yesterday agreed to the deployment of Patriot missiles to South Korea as a 'purely defensive ' move and said the US would defend South Korea against attack from the communist north . Mr Clinton 's assurances followed defiant statements from Pyongyang claiming that US demands for further inspections of nuclear sites were 'perfidious acts . . . creating a grave situation on the Korean peninsula , which may bring the Korean nation back to the phase of confrontation and war ' . Pyongyang 's tough language has prompted concern in Seoul and accelerated plans for the deployment of Patriots . But the US , while making a show of toughness , is allowing time for a diplomatic solution . The Patriot missiles will be sent to South Korea by sea , a voyage that could take as long as 30-45 days . In response to the mounting tension with North Korea , Mr Clinton said : 'We have agreed that it is in our national interests and the interest of the people of South Korea and the security of our armed forces there to proceed with the Patriot deployment . So we will do that . ' Mr Clinton did not disclose the dates of the deployments or the numbers of missiles involved . In a letter to President Kim Young-sam , Mr Clinton also said that the US would defend South Korea if it is attacked by the North . Pyongyang yesterday maintained its defiant stance against concerted international pressure to open its nuclear sites to full inspections . North Korea threatened to withdraw from the nuclear non-proliferation treaty if the US resumes its annual military exercise in South Korea and if the International Atomic Energy Agency decides that North Korea has not complied with its nuclear obligations . The IAEA is likely to refer the North Korean nuclear issue to the UN Security Council today after Pyongyang last week blocked inspection tests by the agency at the Yongbyon nuclear complex . The UN Security Council may then consider economic sanctions on North Korea . Leaving room for Pyongyang to avert an international crisis , the IAEA called on North Korea to allow the agency 's inspectors to undertake meaningful tests at a radiochemical laboratory at Yongbyon , north of the capital , and at other sites . After belligerent statements at the weekend , the North yesterday accused South Korea of 'driving the North-South relationship into a situation of confrontation and war ' , after the collapse of inter-Korean talks on the proposed exchange of presidential envoys . Seoul also resumed preparations for the Team Spirit military exercise , although a decision on its timing has been delayed until President Kim Young-sam discusses the situation on the Korean peninsula with Chinese and Japanese leaders later this week . Mr Warren Christopher , US secretary of state , said US policy would take account of all the risks , but stressed that some form of international action was necessary to combat nuclear proliferation . He insisted that China would co-operate with US strategy because it was in its own best interest . In Moscow , the foreign ministers of Russia and Japan added their countries' support to the IAEA . N Korea 's 'sea of fire ' threat shakes Seoul , Page 6 Editorial Comment , Page 19