German economic growth was forecast yesterday to speed up next year after this year 's faster than expected recovery from recession . The optimistic predictions by the government , just ahead of the October 16 federal elections , coincided with the release of data showing a slower-than-expected growth in August money supply . Mr Gunter Rexrodt , the economics minister , told parliament the government expected the economy to grow by 3 per cent in 1995 . For this year he estimated that expansion would reach 2.5 per cent instead of a previously projected 2.25 per cent . His comments came in a strongly political speech ahead of the election , in which he set the government 's economic record against the policies of the Social Democrat opposition . The minister also forecast that unemployment would fall by 200,000 next year . The Bundesbank announced a much slower annualised growth rate for M3 money supply of 8.2 per cent in August . It reaffirmed its intention to keep a firm hand on monetary policy to secure steady economic growth and lower inflation . With the economy recovering speedily , the Bundesbank is concerned to prevent consumer prices from accelerating . Before the Bundesbank 's announcement , financial markets were concerned that the expansion rate of money supply might again have exceeded 9 per cent . In July , the annualised growth rate for M3 was 9.8 per cent ; in May , it reached 15.4 per cent . In spite of the success of the central bank in bringing down money supply growth , Mr Johan Wilhelm Gaddum , Bundesbank deputy president , said it was still concerned about inflation . In August , west German inflation was 3 per cent , compared with the Bundesbank 's eventual goal of 2 per cent . Mr Gaddum said the price outlook had improved now that fiscal and wage trends were moving in a more moderate direction . 'Yet the progress towards stability still does not mean it is time to sound the all clear . ' That reaffirmation of the Bundesbank 's anti-inflationary stance , and the emphasis on its continued commitment to money supply targets , has led some economists to conclude that it is unlikely to cut interest rates further . Others , however , expect a further cut after the election . The last reduction was in May , when the discount and Lombard rates were cut to 4.5 per cent and 6 per cent respectively . Mr Gaddum indicated last week that there was no reason to cut rates now . The May cuts were aimed at shifting funds from short-term deposits , which show up in M3 , to longer-term investments , which do not . Mr Gaddum added yesterday that the Bundesbank was confident the M3 rate would continue falling towards the 1994 target range of 4 per cent to 6 per cent . Lex , Page 24