In this , the hottest English summer for many a year , the question of the white dinner jacket has reared its lapels . Once they were strictly for the tropics - in winter no gentleman could be seen wearing one north of Port Said . Once through the canal , however , the lightweight barathea cloth meant the Englishman abroad could keep up sartorial standards without fainting . Between the wars , the white dinner jacket became rather fashionable back 'home ' , trailing intimations of long-distance travel and danger on the North-West frontier . But what , I mused , as we wandered the lawns of Glyndebourne on Sunday on a perfect English summer evening , is its current status ? Most of the male Glyndebourne-goers were in black dinner jackets and there were a few eccentric interpretations of contemporary opera-going gear - most idiosyncratic was a black leather kilt accessorised with a spiky hair-cut and an ear-ring . But in the end , convention ruled and black dinner jackets ( the experts tell me that the ultimate colour for a dinner jacket is not black but midnight blue ) outnumbered white by something like 100 to one . Sir Hardy Amies , that legendary arbiter of masculine style , is in no doubt that ' a white evening coat is effortlessly naff ' . More contemporary style advisers , such as John Morgan , Associate Editor of GQ , and Ashley Lloyd-Jennings of Hackett , assure me that while white DJs can be 'extremely , horrendously naff ' they can also be appropriate in very hot weather . John Morgan thinks that nobody too young and too dashing can get away with wearing one : 'It looks like too much of an over-statement as if you're trying too hard . ' If you are , sartorially speaking , a shambles , or happily rotund or what could be called an 'older ' ( whoops , mature ) sort of chap then -if the weather is really hot - Morgan thinks it can look thoroughly distinguished . Lloyd-Jennings says the white dinner jacket should on no account have any facings and careful attention should be paid to the collar-shape - the shawl-collar may pass muster on Humphrey Bogart ( oh , the dash of Bogart as the world-weary Rick Blaine in Casablanca ) and snazzy band-leaders but the rest of you should go for a double-breasted blazer shape with a peak lapel . Lloyd-Jennings adds that white DJs should only be worn in very hot weather - that , after all , is their point . 'They also look extremely nice in linen , ' he tells me . The white DJ should be worn with a white marcella dress-shirt with a normal attached collar ( not winged ) , a black bow-tied ( hand-tied , it goes without saying ) and studs in stone or mother-of-pearl ( not black ) . The black trousers should have braiding . Those who are optimistic about the weather and have a full formal diary for August might like to know that Hackett of 137 , Sloane Street , London SW1 sell plain white ( in reality , of course , they are cream ) double-breasted jackets for Pounds 249 and linen ones can be made to order for about Pounds 375 . But , remember , not if you are too dashing or too young . Perhaps , though , the more persistent problem is what do you wear over your DJ when it rains ?