American International Group , the large US insurer , yesterday reported modest growth in first-quarter profits , in spite of a big jump in catastrophe losses from the January earthquake in southern California . AIG said net income during the quarter totalled Dollars 505.6m , against Dollars 495.6m in the same period last year . After adjustments for accounting changes and capital gains the group 's underlying income rose 6 per cent over the year to Dollars 480.1m . Catastrophe losses at AIG reached Dollars 55m , up from Dollars 7.8m a year earlier . All the losses related to the earthquake , which has become the second-costliest natural disaster in the history of the US insurance industry , behind Hurricane Andrew in 1992 . Commenting on market conditions , Mr Maurice Greenberg , AIG 's chairman , said property insurance rates continued to strengthen in the domestic commercial market , a trend that should be reinforced as the industry absorbs the impact of the recent earthquake and weather-related catastrophes . Apart from the impact of the earthquake , AIG 's businesses put in a solid performance . The group 's general insurance division recorded earnings of Dollars 349.5m , down slightly from Dollars 351.8m a year ago but up 12.5 per cent if the catastrophe business is excluded . Life insurance earnings climbed 18 per cent to Dollars 194.4m , and financial services posted operating income of Dollars 97.1m , up 13 per cent from a year earlier . USF & G , another big insurer , also reported higher catastrophe losses in its quarterly results yesterday , partly from the earthquake and partly from the severe winter storms that swept large parts of the US during the quarter . First-quarter net income was Dollars 23m , down from Dollars 61m a year earlier , although those results included a one-time gain of Dollars 38m related to the adoption of new accounting standards . Catastrophe losses totalled Dollars 40m , Dollars 10m of which was the California earthquake with the remainder being winter storms . Even with the losses , USF & G was able to post income of Dollars 33m on its property/casualty business , down from Dollars 40m a year ago .