A young man triumphantly slams a basketball through the hoop while a woman works out on the treadmill . Dozens of used running shoes are heaped in the corner , and a golf player awaits his turn to try out his back swing on the astroturf . This is not an exclusive health club , but the research laboratories of Reebok in Stoughton , Massachusetts . For Reebok , as for other high-tech sports shoe makers such as Adidas , Nike , LA Gear and New Balance , recreation is big business . The basketball player is stepping on a sensitive 'force plate ' , a device beneath the boards that measures the force of the player 's landing after his jump . The woman on the treadmill is wearing reflectors on strategic parts of her legs and feet . The action is recorded on high-speed video - the reflectors ' movements are then isolated and fed into a computer , where they will be studied in detail . The heaps of running shoes will be inspected to determine how well they held up over miles of use , and the golf player will eventually be converted into a computer stick figure , so that scientists can study the movement of his foot during the back swing . Technology in the sports shoe industry has come a long way in the last 20 years . In the 1960s , most people expected no more from a sports shoe than a little foam and rubber , with canvas or leather on top . The running craze of the 1970s sparked the first interest in shoes tailored to a specific sport . Since then , the sector has blossomed . Companies have tapped research in the aerospace and transport industries to make improvements in design . Shoelaces have been replaced on many models by a less complicated strap system . Sports shoes are pumped up with air , reinforced with high-tech materials , sculptured to the foot and manipulated to eliminate excess weight . Consumers have responded enthusiastically . The global wholesale athletic footwear industry reached Dollars 12.1bn ( Pounds 7.3bn ) in 1993 , according to the NPD Group , a market research firm . For 1994 , the figure is forecast to be even higher . Manufacturers are always looking for new sports to add to their product line . The recent enthusiasm for mountain biking inspired a crusade for the perfect mountain-biking shoe . Adidas is considering developing a shoe for snowboarding , a sport which has taken off in the US , and New Balance just arrived on the market with a new boat shoe , an alternative to moccasins . Companies are also trying to expand their market by making shoes for sports more commonly played in Europe and Asia than in the US . Nike , for instance , will introduce a new line next year that includes footgear for squash , handball , volleyball , cricket and rugby . Hiking boots are also attracting attention , and for good reason . While a tennis shoe , for instance , rarely sells for more than Dollars 120 a pair , hiking boots are often Dollars 200 or more . There is also much room for improvement . Most hiking boots are unnecessarily uncomfortable , according to Spencer White , head of research at Reebok . Because every sport involves different foot movements , manufacturers say athletic shoes need to be tailored for a specific use . Games such as handball or tennis , for instance , require a great deal of lateral ( side-to-side ) movement , requiring a more stable shoe than one worn by walkers . Soccer players like a shoe that fits like a glove , and used to buy footwear too small before manufacturers latched on . American football players need good traction . However , if the shoe gets stuck on a twisting movement , they can hurt their knees . Reebok is trying to design a shoe that would offer both forward and lateral traction , but would still give way on a twisting motion . Even within one sport , athletes ' needs may vary . A dribbler , or defence player in basketball , for instance , needs to move fast and usually prefers a lighter shoe . But offensive players are normally bigger and heavier , and require more stability in the heel for jumping . 'Everything is important , from the form on which the shoe is built to the heel width to the tread pattern , ' says Edith Harmon , product development manager for New Balance . Besides laboratory testing , manufacturers rely on top athletes and testers , often referred to as the 'weekend warriors ' , for input . 'The big athletes are important , but we get even more feedback from people who play sports casually , ' says Guy Marshall , a footwear designer for Adidas . One of the main challenges in the industry is to design a shoe that is both light and strong . 'We are looking to take every last gramme of material out while maintaining the shoe 's stability , ' says Harmon . The right materials are of prime importance . Footwear manufacturers were met with surprise when they showed up at aerospace and transport fairs in the 1980s . Now they have formed direct contacts with chemical firms and other materials developers . Nike , for example , uses a Du Pont concoction called Kevlar for its tennis shoe line . 'One of the main problems in a tennis shoe is getting durability in the forefoot , because players tend to drag their toes , ' says Richard Oldfield , product line manager for the group . 'Kevlar added strength to the shoe without introducing heaviness . ' The material was used in bullet-proof vests and for brake pads on logging lorries before Nike took it up . Makers of running shoes , which need to be especially lightweight , started experimenting with mesh materials in the 1980s . Now meshes are everywhere . Nike also uses a material called Ultralam , used in windsails for windsurfing , for its cross-country training shoes . 'It is light-weight , thin and strong , and we apply it in areas needing extra support , ' says Oldfield . One of Reebok 's latest products , the InstaPump Fury , makes good use of high-tech materials to achieve a lighter weight . The company 's studies revealed just how little pressure most runners place on the arch of their foot . The manufacturer 's response was to eliminate the central section , concentrating material in the forefoot and heel . The result looks like a cross between a high-heel hiking boot and an alien's idea of walking shoes . The foot is given support in the arch through an incredibly thin , lightweight and strong material called Graphlite . The material , originally used in the wings of aeroplanes , runs glass fibres one way and carbon fibres the other , and is covered with a plastic resin . 'The three materials together are much stronger than they would be separately , ' says White . To try to eliminate stress and injury , New Balance uses former transport industry shock absorbers that were once used as a replacement for a heavy steel spring . It also manufactures long-distance running gear with high-wearing , abrasion-resistant rubber . One of the most important innovations in recent years has been air tubes . Nike and Adidas use air chambers in shoe soles for lightweight stability . Reebok uses inflatable uppers for a snugger fit . It is uncertain how far the industry can take its fascination with high technology . Marshall says the last significant innovation was the air pump . 'We are waiting for something really big like that to take the industry forward again . ' Fashion , of course , will play a part in the industry 's future , but manufacturers say it is not their mainstay . ' A lot of people who buy these shoes may never practise the sport , ' says White . 'They just want to wear something that looks cool . We love these people , but we ca n't survive just with their purchases . We need athletes who buy the shoes because of their superior performance . And that is where the high technology comes in . '