South Korean police forces yesterday were placed on emergency alert to guard against possible terrorist attacks in connection with the North Korean nuclear dispute . The new alert came as the International Atomic Energy Agency said yesterday the truth may never be known about the intention of North Korea 's nuclear programme , and stressed that its inspectors must have access to nuclear waste sites . Some analysts believe the most likely response by North Korea to threatened UN sanctions could be terrorist activity in South Korea and Japan , rather than a conventional military attack . The police are increasing surveillance of air terminals and ports to prevent infiltration by North Korean saboteurs and spies , while bolstering security at government buildings and foreign embassies in Seoul . South Korean president Kim Young-sam today will convene the first meeting of the national security council - which consists of senior government ministers - since he took office 16 months ago . The council will discuss the military situation on the Korean peninsula and preparations for a possible conflict . The government will also seek support for sanctions from the main opposition Democratic party , which fears that punitive measures against the North could trigger a war . Mr Kim yesterday warned that North Korea faces international isolation and eventual destruction if it persists in developing nuclear weapons . Senior US and Japanese officials will meet Mr Han Sung-joo , South Korean foreign minister , on Saturday in Seoul to discuss co-ordinated actions on implementing proposed UN sanctions against the North . The visiting officials include Mr Koji Kakizawa , Japanese foreign minister , and Mr Peter Tarnoff , US undersecretary of state for political affairs . The UN Security Council is unlikely to consider a sanctions resolution until next week at the earliest . The US is still consulting with other permanent members of the Security Council and no draft resolution has yet been circulated or distributed . The US , Japan and South Korea support the immediate introduction of limited sanctions that would gradually escalate in their severity . But in an effort to win Chinese support they may propose an interim UN resolution instead that gives North Korea a final deadline to open its nuclear facilities to full international inspections and avoid sanctions . Mr Han , who has been holding consultations at the UN , expressed confidence that China would eventually support some form of sanctions if North Korea continued to refuse inspections . But North Korea is also bidding for Chinese support . General Choe Gwang , the chief of the general staff of the North Korean people 's army , is holding talks with his Chinese counterparts during a week-long visit to Beijing that began on Monday . It is the first visit to China in five years by General Choe , the second-ranking officer in the North Korean military .