There are few more potent symbols of advanced technology in the 1990s than the high speed train . The fast rail networks being developed throughout Europe promise a remarkable reversal of the steady decline of train travel which has been under way since the end of the Second World War . High speed rail services have their origins in the Japanese bullet train or Shinkansen which first went into service between Tokyo and Osaka in 1964 . But it has been in Europe , with its scattered centres of population and its crowded transport routes , that the idea has taken off . A growing awareness of the the potential of rail travel prompted the European Commission in 1990 to launch a programme to bring together national initiatives . Detailed studies are being carried out by a high speed task force while the scope of the programme has recently been extended to include the countries of eastern Europe . The programme , which envisages the creation of a European network of high speed lines by 2010 , involves the construction of 5,600 miles of new track , the upgrading of a further 9,400 miles of track and the creation of 750 miles of linking tracks . The new lines are to take trains running at 160 miles per hour and more , while the upgraded lines will handle speeds of about 125 mph . The aim is to make rail an attractive option for business and leisure travel on journeys of between 125 miles and 625 miles . Even longer journeys would be realistic overnight . Journey times across Europe would roughly be halved with Brussels to Madrid falling to just over eight hours from nearly 16 1/2 hours ; Brussels to Milan to five hours 15 minutes from 10 hours 20 minutes and Brussels to Berlin to six hours 15 minutes from nine hours . The benefits of high speed train travel over airplanes and cars are that it delivers passengers into city centres , it can handle large volumes of traffic , is less polluting than other means of transport and makes more efficient use of energy . In addition , high speed trains boost passenger numbers on connecting slower inter-city and suburban lines , increasing the financial return to the entire network . They also make an important contribution to regional and economic policies , improving links with peripheral regions . Choked European airports , crowded skies and congested motorways have combined to make fast rail travel a viable alternative for many travellers . The costs of creating a pan-European high speed rail network have been estimated at more than Pounds 60bn though it is thought that it could lead to a quadrupling of passenger mileage travelled . Passenger growth coupled with improved productivity could lead to the rail companies achieving a 10 per cent rate of return on the project , it has been calculated . It is France where high speed trains have made the biggest impact and where the most comprehensive network has been established although Germany , too , is creating an ambitious network of high speed services . The French railways began operating its first high-speed trains - trains a grande vitesse ( TGV ) - at up to 170 mph between Paris and Lyon in September 1981 , halving the journey time to just two hours and doubling the volume of passengers using this route . The TGV Atlantique followed in 1989 linking Paris with Bordeaux , Biarritz , Toulouse and Brittany at speeds of up to 185 mph . The imminent opening of the Channel Tunnel led to the construction of high speed lines north from Paris to Lille and Calais while work is also under way on a section to the east of Paris linking the northern and southern routes . Germany began developing a high speed network of InterCity Express ( ICE ) trains in 1988 and now has three routes in service including a link with Berlin . The ICE trains are built by a consortium headed by Siemens while French high speed technology has been developed by the Anglo-French company GEC- Alsthom . Both Spain and Italy are working on ambitious plans to establish high speed networks but both currently run just single lines . The Spanish AVE high speed train , built by GEC- Alsthom , came into service in 1992 on 270 miles of specially built track between Madrid and Seville . In Italy the Direttissima service runs between Rome and Florence although plans for a larger network have been stalled for several years . However , a consortium of international banks and the Italian railways is now putting together proposals for a vastly expanded network linking Turin , Venice , Milan and Naples . At present no high speed service crosses a national border though this will change once Eurostar trains , which are a modified form of TGV , start running between London , Paris and Brussels . But it will not be before about 2002 , that high-speed services will be available on the British side of the tunnel because of delays in beginning work on a high-speed line through Kent to London . The main barrier to cross-border links is the varying technologies used by the different national railways . The Eurostar trains have been designed to take account of three different electricity networks and four signalling systems ( including the one in the Channel Tunnel ) . Track gauges , the distance between the rails , are not a problem in most of Europe though Spain , Portugal , Ireland and Russia differ from the standard gauge . A problem for Britain is its smaller loading gauge which means continental European locomotives and rolling stock are too broad and high to fit between British station platforms or under many bridges . Technical harmonisation is one of the biggest tasks of the task force working on the high speed pan-European network . A priority is to create a unified 'command and control ' system , combining the latest developments in electronics , computing , telecommunications and avionics , to replace the incompatible national systems . A potentially worrying development for the European task force is the development by Germany of magnetic levitation technology whereby trains run on a magnetic cushion above a monorail . The German government gave its approval two months ago for the world 's first commercial 'maglev ' train to run between Berlin and Hamburg at speeds of up to 250 mph . Maglev technology has yet to prove itself in large-scale commercial use but it does raise the prospect of a competing system which can not be fitted into the continental network . Elsewhere in the world conventional 'wheels on rail ' technology is being used for the development of high speed links . The South Korean government last month gave the go-ahead for the construction of a high speed line between Seoul and the port of Pusan by a consortium headed by GEC- Alsthom . Taiwan has plans for a high speed line between Taipei and the southern city of Kao-Hsiung . In North America , meanwhile , European manufacturers are attempting to win contracts for high-speed lines in Texas and between the cities of eastern Canada . To date high speed rail links have made their biggest impact in Europe but they clearly have the potential to revolutionise medium-distance travel around the world .