Sir , During the past decade there has been a plethora of management theories and practices such as 'human resource management ' , 'total quality management ' , 'downsizing ' , 're-engineering ' , 'flatter management structures ' . More recently we have had 'upward appraisals ' . Most of these theories are US imports and are designed , apparently , to confuse the fundamental management principle of command and control through responsibility and accountability . Tony Kippenberger 's statement that 'much of today 's management theory is being questioned ' , ( Letters , October 13 ) , necessarily leads to the assumption that many of these recent management ideas are designed to create confusion and internal chaos and are , perhaps , not relevant to some organisations . Indeed each concept has often been marketed by those consultants who are looking for ways to convince management that this particular technique would work well in their company . For example human resource management is likely to be more effective in smaller companies where everyone has an understanding of each other 's jobs , but not , perhaps , in a large organisation with separate operating divisions and business units . The 'just in time ' ( JIT ) technique is effective where there is a rapid and constant turnover in stock and where space is at a premium , but not so relevant in a large manufacturing company where supplies are needed on demand and where space is available . And performance-related pay ( PRP ) will work in an organisation where there is a culture of individualism and competition , but not where teamwork is an essential part of the equation . Likewise , the current fad of 'upward appraisals ' is likely to work in the US where individualism is the primary order and where there is a more casual approach to the concept of management , accountability and responsibility . It is unlikely to be accepted in the long-established and stratified societies and cultures of Germany , France and the UK ; it will definitely not work in the structured and organised Japanese society . Therefore , there can never be established global management theories and practices simply because of the differences in culture and society . Debate management theories by all means but the recommendation which might come out of any discussion group is that companies should adapt or adopt only those practices which meet the demands of their organisation ; implement techniques of likely benefit to the company ; and condemn ineffective practices to the waste paper basket . Kenneth P Armitage , 6 Debden Valley Drive , Kesgrave , Suffolk IP5 7FB