US hurricane futures , European flood options and even 'Acts of God bonds' will be traded by international investors within the next few years , predicts Mr Richard Sandor , a US financier and a founding father of the financial derivatives industry . Mr Sandor , who pioneered interest rate and currency futures and options in the 1970s and 1980s , says that an embryonic reinsurance derivatives market is established . Catastrophe reinsurance futures and options contracts were launched in December 1992 by the Chicago Board of Trade , which also lists a number of financial and other derivatives contracts . Trade so far has been limited , but the volume of transactions has increased by more than 10 times in the past year or so . More important , the development of an exchange-traded product appears to be directly influencing developments in reinsurance , where an over-the-counter market in catastrophe reinsurance options has emerged . 'It is past its infancy and is really starting to crawl , ' says Mr Sandor , now chief executive and chairman of Centre Financial Products , a New York-based derivatives boutiques firm , which is one of more than a dozen firms trading the contracts in Chicago . Most reinsurers are still highly sceptical about derivatives products . One chief executive argues that the options currently traded on the exchange are at least one and half times more expensive than equivalent reinsurance contracts . Critics say the liquidity in the derivatives market is likely to remain small and that the indices on which the contracts are based are inadequate and inferior to the traditional reinsurance products . However , some reinsurers are more positive . Zurich Insurance , the large Swiss company , owns a stake in Mr Sandor 's company , and others , including two UK brokers - Sedgwick and Willis Corroon - are also exploring the potential . There is interest , too , at Lloyd 's . Mr Richard Keeling , a leading underwriter , said : 'It is interesting ; we ought to be taking it seriously . ' Underpinning the interest is the conviction that the capital base of the orthodox insurance and reinsurance industry is increasingly inadequate to cope with the scale of catastrophic risks , a fact graphically demonstrated by disasters in the US . Hurricane Andrew , which tore through Florida in August 1992 , was the costliest US catastrophe with losses of more than Dollars 16bn . This year 's Northridge earthquake , which killed 60 people and damaged 44,000 California homes in January , was the industry 's second costliest , with losses amounting to more than Dollars 7bn . The severity of the loss was more a reflection of economic growth and demographic change over the past two decades than the power of the seismic shock itself . The Northridge earthquake 'would have been a non-event 25 years ago , ' according to Mr Sandor . Mr Andrew Martin , managing director of Sedgwick Payne Insurance Strategy , says that the capital and surplus of the US property and casualty industry is estimated at Dollars 183bn , 'but many trillions of assets are insured and the risks exposed are increasing faster than insurers ' capital and capacity ' . The Chicago Board of Trade contract is based on an index calculated by the Insurance Services Office ( ISO ) , a US industry body , and on the premiums received and claims paid by more than 24 US insurance companies . Futures contracts are priced according to moves in the ISO loss ratio . The settlement price of each increases by Dollars 250 for each 1 per cent upwards movement in the ratio . For example , while a loss ratio of 20 per cent would give each contract a value of Dollars 5,000 , a loss ratio of 120 per cent would make the contract worth Dollars 30,000 . Although trade in the futures contract itself has failed to take off , investors and buyers have begun to trade options - deals giving buyers the right but not the obligation to buy or sell at a pre-determined price . Most of the contracts are 'call spreads ' , used to limit and isolate a particular layer of risk , explains Mr Morton Lane , managing partner of Lane Financial , a company which advises brokers trading on the exchange . Typically , buyers pay for an option to buy a futures contract when the loss ratio exceeds 50 per cent and sell when the ratio exceeds 70 per cent . The arrangements in effect give protection in the same way as an excess of loss reinsurance contract . Over the past 18 months the CBoT has registered more than 5,000 trades on one particular contract - covering catastrophe losses on the eastern seaboard of the US , where there are large storm exposures . Observers also note a growing trend for reinsurers to use the Chicago contract loss index as an element of a specialist reinsurance policy , the loss warranty . Claims on a loss warranty policy are triggered by two sets of losses : those on the insurance policy of the buyer , and industry-wide claims . Mr Lane says that the exchange has stimulated changes in the way franchise covers are underwritten , with the trigger relating to industry-wide losses becoming more important . As much as 20 times more business could be traded in 'over the counter contracts ' , Mr Lane estimates , with underwriters of these deals frequently hedging their exposures by buying exchange traded contracts . Mr Sandor compares the development to the way in which the underwriters of OTC interest rate swaps hedged their positions by buying eurodollar or US government bond futures in Chicago in the 1980s , helping to fuel the growth of that market . In spite of industry scepticism , enthusiasts stress the attractions of the new products . For example , while the price of a traditional contract is generally known only by broker and underwriter , derivative contracts are transparent . And while reinsurance contracts are negotiated once a year , derivative contracts are more flexible and can be purchased or traded at any time . Mr Martin says the development signals the beginning of the securitisation of the reinsurance industry , bringing it into line with other financial services . 'Insurance and reinsurance may be the last frontier , ' he says .