Susie , a New York-based stockbroker working for a European bank , kept leaving messages on the answerphone of a potential client . After six months , the client rang her and told her he only dealt with US banks . Her story shows just how prevalent answerphones and voice mailboxes are becoming in US business , not only as a means for staff to receive messages when they are absent from their desks but also as a way of filtering calls . Voice mail and answerphones are also becoming more common in Europe , where growing call volumes are turning the telephone into a mixed blessing . According to UK high street retailer Dixons , among the most popular answering machines are those which add a date and time to each message ( with a little help from a computer-generated voice ) . The cheapest of these is a Pounds 39.99 machine from Betacom . BT 's Response 50 goes a step further by bleeping when any messages have been left . But it may not be necessary to buy a separate answering machine at all . Increasingly , answering machines are being included in composite products such as Amstrad 's model which combines one with a fax machine . The latest multimedia home PC from Compaq includes an answerphone with 12 segments - so that parents , for instance , do not have to waste time listening to messages meant for their children . For the corporate environment , voice messaging systems provide similar features to answerphones but can do much more . At their simplest , they allow callers to leave a message if the person they want to talk to is not available . By dialing the appropriate voice mailbox number ( and a code ) , users can play messages back or forward them to another mailbox . But all too often systems are implemented poorly , leading to horror stories of 'voice mail jail ' , where the caller is trapped in the system and bounced from one voice mailbox to another . However , individual users can be at fault . As a consequence , some US companies have appointed 'voice mail police ' . These are staff tasked with spying on colleagues to see if they are changing their greetings regularly - for instance , when they are on holiday - and actually listening to their messages . The penalty for breaking the rules is to lose your voice mailbox and once again be subjected to a barrage of calls . Another potential problem with voice mail is security . This is because , depending on how they are set up , PABXs ( switchboards ) with integrated voice mail can be vulnerable to hackers . If special tones are used to operate a voice mailbox , these can sometimes be used to operate the PABX . In this way , a number of hackers have used US company switchboards to run up huge bills . The Voice Messaging Educational Committee ( VMEC ) , whose members include AT & T , BT Mobile , Octel Communications and VMX will publish a guide to voice mail security next month . In spite of security problems , use of voice mail is expanding in the US . A study there by the voice systems consultancy Vanguard Communications says that the US voice mail industry grew over 20 per cent last year , with sales topping Dollars 1.2bn . Don Van Doren , president of Vanguard , says : 'The bottom line is that voice mail improves communication , saving time and money . ' In Europe the profile of public voice messaging is increasing , largely because cellular phone operators provide voice mailboxes linked to users' mobile phones . The market for voice processing as a whole ( including voice messaging ) is growing at 35-40 per cent a year in Europe , according to Robin Scurlock , head of BIS Strategic Decision 's messaging programme . He says : 'At this year 's Voice '94 show much of the technology that had been promised was on display especially in the area of call centres and voice integration on the local-area network . ' Call centre systems are designed to capture the three out of every four calls that the voice messaging industry estimates fail to get through first time . The systems are designed to allocate calls to the next free person in a telesales environment and to provide a computer screen full of information on any customer that has called before . They can also provide a list of calls which need to be made . In the area of voice integration , GPT launched a product at Voice '94 which allows users on a PC network to get a list of all their fax , voice and electronic mail messages . They can then use a mouse to click on the ones , they want to see or hear . Suppliers which have ( or are developing ) integrated products for the desktop include VMX , Octel Communications , C3 , Applied Technology , Dialogic , Active Voice , Radish Communications and Converse . However , Elaine Cascio , a consultant at Vanguard Communications , warns that no one really knows whether users want to be able to see all their different types of messages at once . There are many different types of voice processing ( of which voice mail is one ) . They go by a confusing array of names and there is some overlap between them . Audiotex is one of the simplest categories and is used for 0898 recorded information , such as racing results . Another category is interactive voice response ( IVR ) . This is the type of technology used in some home banking and home shopping systems . It might , for example , prompt the use to 'press one to check your bank balance ' or 'press two to order a cheque book ' . These systems effectively link a voice interface to a computer database . They allow customers to input and retrieve information either by using a touch-tone phone or by using speech recognition technology . Interest in voice technology is growing as computers and telecommunications begin to converge . For example , PC software companies like Microsoft and Novell are muscling in and trying to set competing standards for CTI ( computer telephony integration ) . But national character plays a big part in the level of adoption . BIS says people in the Netherlands and Sweden are less keen to talk to machines than the English . Americans are probably the most comfortable with speaking to machines . In Japan it might be hard to find an executive willing to leave messages on an answerphone for six months . Scurlock says : 'In Japan the receptionist often takes the message verbally and then records it on a machine . ' * Copies of VMEC 's voice mail security guide can be obtained from any VMEC member company or from Vanguard Communications in the US . Tel : 201 605 8000 .