The Israeli defence force was refusing last night to confirm reports that 19-year-old Corporal Nachshon Waxman , the Israeli soldier facing a death threat from the extremist Islamic Hamas movement , had been found alive in the town of Ramallah on the Israeli-occupied West Bank . Israeli forces had nevertheless sealed off the town . As Israel and the Palestinian Palestine Liberation Organisation struggled to save the Middle East peace process from collapse , the crisis overshadowed the award of the Nobel peace prize yesterday to Mr Yitzhak Rabin , Israel's prime minister , Mr Shimon Peres , the foreign minister , and Mr Yassir Arafat , PLO chairman . Hamas had said it would kill Corp Waxman unless Israel released Sheikh Ahmed Yassin , the spiritual leader of Hamas , and 200 other Palestinian prisoners . As the deadline was due to expire last night , an emergency session of the Israeli cabinet ruled out meeting the kidnappers ' demands and rejected a dialogue with the Islamic fundamentalists . However , Hamas later said it would extend the deadline by 24 hours , following an Israeli offer , delivered secretly by a member of the Knesset . Mr Arafat , under intense pressure from Israel and the US to secure the release of the soldier , ordered the arrest of more Hamas members in the Gaza Strip . Palestinian officials said more than 200 Islamic activists were being held yesterday . Israel has chosen to make the safe release of Corp Waxman a test of Mr Arafat 's ability to increase security for Israelis . Mr Rabin has said Mr Arafat must make ' a strategic choice ' between continuing the peace process and dealing with Hamas . Mr Warren Christopher , US secretary of state , echoed Israel 's demands in a meeting with Mr Arafat in Egypt yesterday . Mr Christopher said he had told the PLO leader to 'confront the reign of terror imposed by Hamas ' . Hamas , outraged at the widescale arrests of its activists , has also said that Mr Arafat must choose between Hamas and the peace process . Mr Mahmoud Zohar , a leading Hamas activist in Gaza , warned Mr Arafat would 'have to suffer the consequences ' if he continued his clampdown . 'Preserving Palestinian peace is better than preserving peace with Israel , ' he said . Mr Arafat 's aides have cautioned Israel and the international community against making demands for a direct confrontation with Hamas , saying the peace deal is still too fragile and the benefits too limited to guarantee that the pro-peace forces would win against a strong and organised opposition . The controversial award of the Nobel peace prize to Mr Arafat and Mr Rabin was expected after being leaked earlier this week in a newspaper in Oslo . But it was not widely anticipated that Mr Peres would also be named . It is the first time the peace prize has gone to more than two recipients . Christopher rebuffs Russian peace moves in Kuwait , Page 3