The rate of annual growth in M0 , the narrowest measure of money supply , fell back in November , Bank of England figures yesterday showed . Measured on a seasonally adjusted basis , M0 grew 7.1 per cent in the year to November . This was lower than in October and September when M0 grew by 7.3 per cent and 7.2 per cent respectively . However , the annual growth rate was slightly higher than the market had expected and remains well outside the government 's target monitoring range of 0 to 4 per cent . With the markets dogged by speculation about whether Mr Kenneth Clarke , the chancellor , and Mr Eddie George , governor of the Bank of England , will raise interest rates when they meet tomorrow , analysts were yesterday divided about the implications of the data . M0 has traditionally been taken by the Bank of England as an important inflation indicator . However the Bank and Treasury have recently moved away from using monetary aggregates to set interest policy , not least because M0 has diverged from retail sales and inflation trends this year . Ms Helen MacFarlane , economist at brokers Hoare Govett , said that the slowdown in M0 should 'move it down the authorities ' risk list ' . 'Month-on-month M0 growth seems to be moving back more in line with retail sales . If true , this implies that November may have been a poor month for retailers , although this may reflect prices rather than volumes , ' she said . Mr Andrew Cates of brokers UBS yesterday argued that the M0 data suggested that a there was a strong case for a base rate rise this month . 'The current growth in M0 clearly gives cause for concern about future inflation , ' he said , pointing out that in spite of the fall in the annual growth rate of M0 in November the three month annualised rate remained strong , running at 7.2 per cent in November , compared with 5.3 per cent in August . The rate of annual growth in notes and coins , which represent 99 per cent of M0 , grew by 6.8 per cent in the year to November , compared with an annual growth rate of 7.1 per cent in October . The Bank of England yesterday said the measure for broad money supply M4 grew by 3.9 per cent in the year to October .