Corporate venturing in the UK has failed to match early hopes , according to a paper * published last week . Corporate venturing is the process where big business invests in small business through taking minority equity stakes - usually in emergent , high-technology companies . It is supposed to provide windows on new tech- nology , takeover opportunities as research matures and , eventually , big profits . Investment may be direct , but is more usually via a fund run by an experienced venture capital manager used to finding growing businesses worth backing . The paper , by Kevin McNally of the Urban Policy Research Unit at Southampton University , makes depressing reading for anyone who attended a 1984 London conference organised by Arthur Andersen , the accountancy firm , and Venture Economics , the collector and publisher of venture capital data . The conference tried to persuade chairmen , chief executives and finance directors of leading UK companies that corporate venturing was a good thing . What has happened since can only be interpreted as 10 years of failure , as McNally reveals . Whereas the US venture capital industry received about 20 per cent of funds from corporate venturers during the 1980s , Britain 's peaked at a 6 per cent share ( Pounds 34m ) in 1988 and a value of Pounds 62m ( 4 per cent share ) in 1989 . McNally says there is some evidence of pick-up since - Pounds 50m from corporate sources in 1992 and a 15 per cent share of funds raised last year -but pension funds , insurance companies and other financial institutions continue to dominate the ranks of fund-providers . The research covered 41 venture capital funds . Although 16 had attracted corporate venturing contributions , the base is narrow : 12 were run by Advent International and only one-third of all the corporate venturers were UK companies ; 30 per cent were from the US , 11 per cent Japan , and 7 per cent Australia . Of the remaining funds , six had been rebuffed by companies they approached and many of the others had not bothered on the grounds that there were easier ways of getting investors . Many fund managers believe corporate venturers are not worth the trouble . They are seen as short-termist , with unrealistic expectations of quick , spectacular returns . They also fail to understand how venture capitalism works - as a portfolio of investments where the lemons ripen before the plums . Corporate venturers may be less common in the UK because of the industry's focus . Seed capital , start-up or early-stage funding accounted for 31 per cent of monies disbursed by US funds in 1991 , compared with 6 per cent in the UK . Also , if management buy-outs and buy-ins are excluded , 84 per cent of US disbursements were in technology-related projects , against the UK 's 30 per cent . This suggests the UK venture capital industry may not actually be doing much in the market segment where corporate venturing might appeal more to big companies . McNally thinks corporate venturers could fill funding gaps now appearing as pension funds and insurance companies become more cautious . His research is useful because it shows how to develop more mutual self-interest for both sides . Potential corporate venturers need to correct their long-term vision , but venture capital funds need to find more technological projects at a fundamental or prototype stage for them to look at . One problem , however , remains the same as spelt out by a speaker at the 1984 conference : 'Large companies are usually very uncomfortable with small businesses . There is often an attitude of 'If it 's good why do n't we own all of it : if it 's bad , why are we messing about like this ? '' It looks uphill all the way . * Sources of Finance for UK Venture Capital Funds : the Role of Corporate Investors , by Kevin McNally . Urban Policy Research Unit , Department of Geography , University of Southampton . Price Pounds 10 .