China is opening its booming domestic airline business to foreign participation on a limited basis . The move is certain to attract considerable interest from the international aviation industry . The official China Daily reported yesterday that foreign carriers would be permitted to invest in local airlines or launch joint projects . Foreigners would also be encouraged to invest in ground facilities such as the operation of terminals and catering . Foreign investment would be limited to 35 per cent , and voting rights could not exceed 25 per cent , the newspaper quoted a government circular prepared by the Civil Aviation Authority and Ministry of Trade as saying . Although Beijing announced last year that it would allow foreign participation in its domestic airlines , yesterday 's statement reveals more detail about the scope and nature of foreign investment . China , whose annual rates of passenger growth of about 20 per cent are among the world 's highest , has been striving to upgrade its domestic airlines and facilities , but has found it almost impossible to cope with the huge and growing demand in this latest phase of its economic liberalisation . The official circular specified that in the case of joint venture airlines and ground facilities the positions of chairman and general manager should go to Chinese . Other positions could be filled by foreigners . The directive said airlines with foreign investment would be treated equally with airlines owned and operated exclusively by the government . International carriers have long been eyeing the Chinese market . A western airline executive said yesterday that China had the 'potential of being the largest airline market in the world .. virtually every airline is interested ' . China now has more than 30 regional airlines and has declared for the moment a moratorium on the licensing of new carriers following a rash of accidents and near misses . Foreign airlines have already made a start in attempts to become more involved in China 's aviation business . Lufthansa , for example , has a joint venture with Air China which provides aircraft maintenance at Beijing capital airport . Qantas , the Australian carrier , has an aicraft maintenance joint venture with China Southern airlines based in Guangzhou and Thai Airways is training cabin crews for the Guangzhou-based carrier . Boeing is close to clinching a Dollars 5bn deal to supply 50 jets to China following President Clinton 's decision to extend most favoured nation status . Under the agreement the Chinese could order as many as 15 each of Boeing's new twin-engine 777 jets , the mid-size 757s and smaller 737s . They may also buy several wide-bodied 747-400 jumbos .