China yesterday warned that the cancellation of preferential trade access to the US market would have devastating consequences for the Taiwanese and Hong Kong economies . Mr Qian Qichen , China 's foreign minister , in a clear attempt to mobilise regional concerns over Most Favoured Nation status to press Beijing 's case , said that Hong Kong and Taiwanese businessmen risked losing billions of dollars in the event of a trade war . ' I think the US can bear such losses , so can China , but I do n't think the other regions and countries can , ' Mr Qian said . Huge quantities of Chinese exports were transshipped through Hong Kong to the US , he said , while Taiwanese businessmen had invested vast sums in mainland enterprises geared to the US market . The World Bank estimates that 96 per cent of Chinese exports , principally textiles and garments , benefit from a lower tariff regime in the US . Mr Qian was speaking some 48 hours after Mr Warren Christopher , the US secretary of state , left Beijing following acrimonious discussions on the human rights issue . Washington is seeking to link 'overall , significant improvement ' in China's human rights behaviour to the renewal of its Most Favoured Nation trading status . China had greeted Mr Christopher 's arrival by detaining more than a dozen dissidents in preceding days . Chinese officials have warned that cancellation of MFN would cripple access for US business to China . Two-way trade exceeded Dollars 40bn ( Pounds 27.3bn ) last year , heavily in China 's favour . But American companies are beginning to make a stronger showing . Hong Kong would be most affected by a rupture over MFN . The HK government estimates that projected economic growth this year of 5.5 per cent would halve and perhaps as many as 75,000 jobs would be lost . Some Dollars 24bn worth of trade would be jeopardised . Mr Christopher sought to put the best face on what had been a fairly disastrous visit , saying differences had 'narrowed ' . But the Chinese themselves were less sanguine . ' I am somewhat disappointed , ' said Mr Qian . 'My talks with Christopher have not produced as many results as previously expected . ' See Editorial Comment