Donald Trump is in his headquarters office on the 26th floor of Trump Tower , a glittering high-rise on New York 's Fifth Avenue . Seated on the far side of one of America 's larger executive desks , he has agreed to talk about the the rise and fall , and rise again , of Donald J. Trump . But time is money , and his attention span is notoriously short . Quickly , then , the story so far . Two years ago it looked as though Mr Trump -or The Donald , as people call him - might no longer have his desk , his office , his tower , or any of the rest of the property and casino empire he built up during the 1980s . Brought to the edge of bankruptcy by a combination of debt and collapsing asset values , he seemed destined to go the same way as the Reichmann brothers , Robert Campeau , and other over-extended victims of the decade of excess . And yet , he has survived . Helped by the cashflows from his casinos , he has reorganised or paid off a large part of his debts . His private yacht may have gone ; so has the Trump Shuttle airline ( now part of USAir ) , and a 49 per cent stake in the Plaza Hotel in New York . But the rest of the empire - the Trump Tower , Trump Parc , Trump Palace and Trump Plaza high-rises in New York , and the Trump Plaza , Trump 's Castle and Trump Taj Mahal casinos in Atlantic City - is remarkably intact . Now , at 47 , The Donald is making his comeback . Last month he married Marla Maples , the 30-year-old actress who eight weeks earlier had given birth to their daughter , Tiffany . Admittedly , the bride 's Dollars 2m tiara was borrowed from a New York jeweller , but the wedding put the Trump name back in the headlines across the world . Next , Mr Trump plans to return to the headlines with his business deals . In a few weeks ' time , he hopes to pay off the rest of his personal debt by floating his Atlantic City casinos on the stock market . He says he is looking at five or six possible locations for new casinos , or riverboat casinos , outside Atlantic City . And in New York , he aims to press ahead with his long-dormant Dollars 3bn project to develop the 75-acre Penn Central railway yards in Manhattan . Mr Trump acknowledges that he was in deep trouble at the turn of the decade . 'But it happened to everybody , virtually . The real estate markets were collapsing throughout the world . ' His personal low , he says , came at the beginning of 1991 , when his financial difficulties coincided with the bitter divorce proceedings that ended his marriage with Ivana Zelnicek . He also acknowledges that he sacrificed some assets to get himself out of trouble - but only , he says , unimportant ones . ' A yacht is an easy thing . I sold the yacht because I never got to use it because I was too busy . I sold some of the toys , but the big toy , the great toy , is Mar-a-Lago ( his palatial estate in Palm Beach , Florida ) . I never sold that . ' Times were hard . ' I had a couple of bad years , ' says Mr Trump . And the mauling the media gave him led him to sympathise with others who suffer the same fate . 'One of the people that I think has gotten a really bad rap - somebody I know just little bit because he was at my home , Mar-a-Lago - is Prince Charles , from your country . I think he 's a wonderful guy . He 's taken a lot of heat . I think he could get a little better press . ' But on the issue that really matters - the state of the Trump Organisation - his recurring theme is that the business is stronger than ever . 'The Taj Mahal ( one of the three Atlantic City casinos ) has just set an all-time record - it made a profit of Dollars 135m last year . No casino in history has ever made that much money . ' While it is true that the casinos are doing well , it is less easy to determine what The Trump Organisation is worth . In 1992 , Business Week , the US business magazine , calculated that Mr Trump 's liabilities exceeded his assets by Dollars 1.4bn . Mr Trump disputed the figure at the time , and in any case it is long out of date : but not even The Donald will attempt to put a value on his business . 'It 's a very substantial number , ' he says . 'But I really ca n't tell you exactly because it 's very hard to value what the Taj Mahal 's worth , or what the Trump Plaza 's worth , or what the land 's worth . ' In one sense , it does n't much matter : investing in The Trump Organisation was always an act of faith , and is likely to stay that way . That is how The Donald says it should be . 'If a person owning bonds in the Taj Mahal didn't sell their bonds , those bonds would be golden : that investment would be gold . If they sold them , I ca n't help them because they were n't loyal . But the people who were confident in me all came out ahead . ' The hard times taught him a lot about loyalty , he says . Some people he had n't much liked turned out to be good friends , and others he trusted let him down . 'There are a couple of people I trusted who , I 'm glad that I learned , were n't particularly loyal . And now they 're coming back to me , kissing my ass and wanting to get back on the gravy train , and they haven't got a shot . ' But what drives The Donald to do what he does ? A lust for power , or wealth , or beautiful women ? Is it sheer egomania that makes him want to acquire more and bigger buildings , and put his name on them ? Or some displaced desire for immortality ? ' I hate to sound like an overly negative person , but people ask me why I go forward , and I say it 's because I have nothing else to do . Because it's true . What else am I going to do ? Watch television ? Read a book ? I read books anyway , but I mean , what else am I going to do ? We 're here , we 're put on this earth for an average of 72.3 years , and after we 've gone , who the hell knows what happens ? And in the meantime , I just like the game . ' The Donald is getting fidgety . Clearly , his attention span has reached its limit . At some unseen sign , people have started wandering in through the open door to his office , ready to start the next meeting . 'Come in , Henry , ' says The Donald . 'Sit down Henry , just sit down . I 'm just finishing up an interview with the Financial Times . It 's going to be a very negative story , based on the questions . But you know what ? Who gives a shit . I do n't even care . One of the things I 've learned is that I just don't care . '