South Korea yesterday indicated that it might accept loggers escaping from North Korean-managed lumber camps in Russia . Seoul has so far refused to grant asylum to at least 120 workers who have fled the logging camps because of fears that it could antagonise Pyongyang and disrupt inter-Korean negotiations on North Korean nuclear inspections . But the recent collapse of the nuclear talks has persuaded the government 'to review the issue based on the principle of humanitarianism , ' said Mr Choo Don-shik , the presidential spokesman . The government is also responding to growing public pressure to accept the loggers , who are considered South Korean citizens under its constitution . The lumber camps , which employ 15,000 North Koreans , were established in Siberia in the late 1960s , with North Korea providing labour in return for receiving wood supplies valued at Dollars 100m . The camps are estimated to provide Russia with Dollars 300m worth of lumber annually . North Koreans who have fled the lumber camps speak of food shortages , beatings , and death sentences for those trying to escape . Russia has pressed North Korea to improve conditions at the camps and threatened not to renew the logging contract , which expired at the end of 1993 . The contract has been extended until June as Moscow continues negotiations with Pyongyang . Seoul will consider granting the loggers immediate asylum or ask Russia to accept them as refugees , with a promise that they would be eventually resettled in South Korea . But North Korea has warned against any interference by Russia or South Korea and said it would hold Seoul responsible for 'kidnapping ' loggers found missing from the camps . But even if South Korea accepts the loggers , officials remain worried that it could trigger a bigger exodus from the camps and possibly encourage people living in North Korea to flee across the border to Russia and China . 'President Kim ( Young-sam ) fears that allowing the loggers into South Korea may eventually lead to the sudden collapse of North Korea , just as the exodus of East German tourists to Hungary and Austria in 1989 led to the collapse of the East German government , ' said one presidential aide . China has only limited influence in persuading North Korea to accept nuclear inspections , a senior Chinese official said yesterday . 'Many people believe that China can instruct North Korea to do this or that . But that 's not true , ' said Mr Wu Xueqian , vice-chairman of the Chinese political consultative conference .