THE ENGINEER IN THE GARDEN by Colin Tudge Jonathan Cape Pounds 17.99 , 398 pages As Bernard Shaw said to Ellen Terry : 'Yes , but what if our children had my looks and your brains ? ' Genetic engineering promises to help them out . It can also change the plants and animals we share the earth with . What is genetic engineering ? It sounds easy : a strip of material carrying genetic information is snipped from one organism and patched into another . The cells ' enzymes tidy up . What genetic engineering offers is a cross between the specific genes of any life form with any other life form . For humans , all we have to do is sort out the 100,000 genes divided or scattered into 3 billion base pairs . Each one does something different . Colin Tudge has written a frustrating book , The Engineer in The Garden which charts the history and state of genetic engineering . Equipped with a glossary of genetic terms and a few 'idiot ' guides , a reader would have some chance . But Tudge makes it hard going . The information is embedded , like small fossils , in the bedrock of the prose . There is no list of further reading , no page of notes , and no chronological table of genetic science . These serious doubts aside , this can be a rewarding book . Tudge starts with Darwin on natural selection ( 1859 ) and arrives at Crick and Watson on 'The molecular structure of nucleic acids : a structure for deoxyribose nucleic acid ( DNA ) ' in 1953 . Then come the molecular biologists and Michael Crichton 's DNA chains on screen at Jurassic Park . En route , Tudge treats no question as trivial and delivers masses of information . But the result confused . While we learn about bees , gannets , deer , peacocks and crocodile eggs , Tudge moves between scientific practice and its history . He covers the moral issues which surround DNA fingerprinting and genetic enhancement . He invokes the twin imperatives of hubris and blasphemy which seem to be the only concepts developed enough to counter an unchecked drive into a geneticised future . One piece of good news : since DNA in men and women behaves differently , neither gender is superfluous . Neither is sex , or at least there is now an alluring scent called 'DNA ' . . . in a double-helix shaped bottle . Tudge steers clear of the commercial concerns which drive the research . But gene technology with bioengineering have a future as limitless as life itself . Last month 's Regulation of the United Kingdom Biotechnology Industry and Global Competitiveness * suggested that food containing genetically engineered organisms need not be labelled for consumers ; it also pointed out that 'excessively precautionary ' and 'unscientific ' regulations might be handicapping the UK biotechnology industry alongside less stringent controls in the US and Japan . But how is the human species doing , genetically ? Tudge has a good chapter on human improvability . Darwin knew rightly that each species has 'descent with modification . ' We are bigger , taller , healthier than we used to be , but why are not we all Bach or Einstein or Freud ? Is there a gene which causes absent-mindedness in the same sense as there is a gene which causes blue eyes or wrinkles ? The Human Genome Project predicts a map of every gene in the body inside ten years . Already inherited deafness , cystic fibrosis and sickle-cell anemia have been linked to single genes ; and now the genes which cause inherited breast cancer have been traced to positions on the chromosome , give or take half a million pairs . Tudge 's book follows the genre evolved by Richard Dawkins and Stephen Jay Gould : intellectual scientific commentary . As more books like this one emerge , we should recognise that 'intellectual ' and 'scientist ' are gradually and rightly converging in the public mind . The arty side of CP Snow 's 'Two Cultures ' will have to adapt to survive in a hostile world . ( * House of Lords Select Committee on Science and Technology 7th Report , Paper 80 , HMSO Pounds 21.00 . )