Murder ? Suicide ? Plain old age ? The way cells die - regarded for decades as an obscure by-way of biology - has become a subject of burning scientific interest . Researchers are stampeding into the study of cell death and American venture capitalists are racing after them , eager to pour millions of dollars into biotechnology companies exploiting their work . They see it as a new route to treatments for intractable diseases including cancer , Alzheimer 's and Aids . Scientists have known for many years that billions of cells die every day , even in the healthiest people , to make room for new cells . But they have only recently realised that all cells are programmed to perish by the same process in every part of the body , from blood to brain , and in all creatures from primitive worms to humans . The process - which has the evocative name of apoptosis , from the Greek word for the shedding of leaves - is really cell suicide . Once apoptosis has been triggered , a cell destroys itself within a few hours . Its membranes break down and enzymes split up the genetic material in the nucleus . At the same time , the main body of the cell shrinks and breaks up into small pieces which are eventually consumed by neighbouring cells . Although three Edinburgh University cancer researchers - Andrew Wyllie , John Kerr and the late Alastair Currie - had discovered apoptosis in the early 1970s , most biologists regarded it as no more than an interesting curiosity until the late 1980s . They were more interested in the way cells divide and grow and how they respond to germs and drugs than in their suicidal behaviour . The reason for all the excitement now is that research over the past five years has shown apoptosis to be a far more widespread phenomenon with much wider implications than anyone had suspected . Indeed , it turns out that all cells are programmed to die in a clean and orderly way through apoptosis when their time comes . The other way a cell can die is through 'necrosis ' - a much cruder process of sudden and unprogrammed destruction following accidental injury , burns , poisoning , asphyxiation or virulent infection . Apoptosis plays a particularly important role at the very earliest stage of life . It shapes the developing embryo in the womb , removing cells where they are not needed . To take a simple example , it leaves clear spaces between the growing toes of most animals ; but in water birds the level of apoptosis is reduced and webbing remains between the toes . Another vital function of apoptosis - in embryonic development and then throughout life - is apparently to maintain a natural selection process in the body . 'What seems to be emerging from research is that the best cells are selected for development and unwanted cells are removed , ' Wyllie says . The immune system depends on apoptosis to regulate the number of blood cells available to defend the body against invading germs . Someone infected with a new virus makes huge numbers of special cells to recognise and kill the invaders ; when the threat is over , almost all the defenders commit suicide , leaving just a few to remember the virus in case it invades again . So apoptosis is essential for maintaining a healthy balance between the growth of new cells and elimination of old ones . If the balance is lost , disease results . One of the first scientists to popularise the role of apoptosis in disease was Luc Montagnier , the French discoverer of HIV . He has been promoting for several years the idea that the virus causes Aids by forcing too many T-cells in the immune system to commit suicide . Too much apoptosis may also be a cause of degenerative brain diseases such as Alzheimer 's ; indeed , any apoptosis at all is bad news for the brain , as its cells are the only ones in the body that do not renew themselves routinely in adult life . Too little apoptosis , on the other hand , results in the cell proliferation characteristic of cancer and the abnormal immune reactions responsible for rheumatoid arthritis . Hopes of intervening in the process - and shrinking tumours , for example , by persuading their cancer cells to commit suicide - rest on finding the genes that control apoptosis . In the humble nematode worm Caenorhabitis elegans , a favourite subject for genetic research because of its simple structure , Robert Horvitz and colleagues at Massachusetts Institute of Technology have already identified 16 genes involved in apoptosis ; some of these are apparently related to human genes that may trigger or suppress cancer . Horvitz chairs the scientific advisory board of Idun Pharmaceuticals ( named after a Nordic goddess who keeps apples bright and shining ) . It is one of several biotechnology companies started recently in the US to commercialise apoptosis research . Others include Apoptosis Technology and LXR Biotechnology . The prospect of manipulating cell death to cure cancer or prevent degenerative brain disease may yet turn out to be an illusion . But the existence of apoptosis companies shows that investors expect something to come of it within a decade or so .