A building surge is under way on Nashville 's Music Row , the centre of America 's country music industry , as record companies invest millions of dollars in new or expanded offices . Los Angeles-based songwriters have begun checking out the Nashville housing market because they are thinking of moving there from the West Coast . And in downtown Nashville , work is under way on an entertainment complex which will house a country music dance club-concert hall and a television production centre . All attest to the extraordinary growth of the past few years in the country music industry , which is synonymous with Nashville and which is giving a substantial lift to the Tennessee economy . Country music 's share of US record sales has soared from just 6.8 per cent in 1989 to 17.5 per cent in 1993 . Record revenues have leapt from Dollars 921m to Dollars 1.76bn . In 1993 more than 41 per cent of the US population tuned their radios to country stations , compared to 34.2 per cent just two years earlier . The format has been making big gains outside its traditional base in the American South . Boosters in Nashville claim that country stations are now ranked number one in the ratings in such unlikely northern markets as Seattle , Buffalo and Baltimore . Now the industry is making a push to conquer the world : Garth Brooks , country music 's most popular artist , has just been on a European tour , and Europe 's first full-time terrestrial country radio station is starting to broadcast from London . It is a lucrative sea-change for Nashville , since after a series of booms in the 1950s and 1960s , country music became stuck in a rut in the early 1980s . Dominated by middle-aged stars with a penchant for elaborate , old-fashioned costumes , playing music with a synthetic , syrupy sound , it faced a downturn in sales . The turnround is due to two main forces . The first is a new breed of much younger musicians with lots of sex appeal , carefully cultivated by the record companies . The men tend to be known collectively as 'new country hunks ' or 'hat acts , ' because of the cowboy hats many of them favour . They dress in plain , figure-hugging blue jeans . Both male and female artists tend to sing songs with a much simpler , more traditional sound , emphasising fiddles , guitars and a single voice . And their lyrics have a more contemporary flavour . For example , Garth Brooks , the biggest phenomenon to hit the industry in decades , has tackled delicate subjects such as wife-beating and date rape . Country has been helped by the sheer weakness and fractured nature of other pop formats . Ageing baby boomers find it easier to relate to country - which reminds them of early 1970s rock groups such as The Band and The Eagles - than to rap , grunge or heavy metal . The second important factor is the growth of cable television in the US , bringing specialised country channels into homes across the nation , far beyond the music 's traditional heartland . The Nashville Network , which began in 1983 , reaches 60m US homes . It has a magazine format , mixing music with programmes on other subjects which stir the soul of rural America , such as bass fishing , pick-up trucks and drag racing . Its more recently established sister channel , Country Music Television ( CMT ) is in almost 25m US cable homes , a 44 per cent increase in a year , and reaches more than 38m homes worldwide . CMT broadcasts non-stop country music pop videos . Both channels are owned by Nashville-based Gaylord Entertainment , which has become to country music what Walt Disney is to children 's entertainment , with interests ranging from theme parks to hotels . At the heart of the Gaylord empire lies the Grand Ole Opry , a folksy country show broadcast from Nashville ever since 1925 . The Opry has played a crucial role in commercialising country music - which stems from the folk ballads of 18th century immigrants to the Appalachian mountains - and in ensuring that Nashville is the capital of the business . The Opry House , where performances are held , is the centrepiece of Gaylord's Opryland complex , which lies just outside Nashville . This also includes a theme park revolving around country music and a vast hotel , particularly popular for conventions , which features enormous glass-enclosed gardens . Gaylord last year announced plans to spend Dollars 175m to add 979 rooms to the existing 1,891 and create another big glassed area , called 'The Delta . ' The company is also busy in downtown Nashville . It is responsible for the new dance hall entertainment complex and is also renovating the interior of the Ryman Auditorium , a tourist spot which is revered as the home of the Grand Ole Opry from 1943 to 1974 . The boom is thus having a substantial ripple effect on the wider Nashville economy , helping the construction , hotel , restaurant and transport industries . Eastern Tennessee , for its part , benefits from the presence in the foothills of the Great Smoky Mountains of Pigeon Forge , home of Dollywood , a 90-acre theme park owned by the most famous female star of country music , Dolly Parton . However , one part of the country music surge has slipped beyond Tennessee's borders : a thriving strip of music halls has grown up in Branson , Missouri , a small town deep in the Ozark Mountains , which features old-time country artists and other popular , middle-of-the-road entertainers . Some critics argue that the rise of Branson is a rebuke to Nashville , which should have been sufficiently entrepreneurial to see there was a gap in the market for old-style acts . The Nashville establishment , for its part , tends to dismiss Branson as being not genuinely 'country . ' The biggest question facing country is how long the boom can last and whether it will be followed by a bust . Industry leaders are resigned to a slowing of the growth rate , but many argue that country is unlikely to suffer a precipitous decline in US popularity . Country might also make inroads in overseas markets - although some observers question whether Europeans will ever warm to such a sentimental , quintessentially middle-American musical format . Mr David Hall , general manager of TNN , points out that at the end of each previous period of growth , industry revenues have remained higher than when the craze first began , and he expects this long-term pattern to continue . Whereas in the past the industry was reliant on radio stations to sell its image , television is a much more powerful medium for keeping America sold on country .