A senior US state department official arrived last night in South Korea , en route for talks in North Korea today when he will seek the release of Chief Warrant Officer Bobby Hall , the US army helicopter pilot downed over the North on December 17 . Mr Thomas Hubbard , a deputy assistant secretary of state , was part of the US team that reached the agreement on nuclear non-proliferation with North Korea in October . He was sent on his new mission after North Korean diplomats at the UN had suggested that this would 'facilitate a resolution' of the problem . But broadcasts and statements from Pyongyang over the last 48 hours have alleged that the helicopter was on a spying mission and have demanded that the US admit as much . US officials have maintained that it strayed into North Korea while on routine training because of a navigational error . Even so , the US has apologised for the violation of the North 's air space . Congressman Bill Richardson , the New Mexico Democrat who brought home the body of the other US pilot killed in the incident , said the new mission could strengthen the hand of the North Korean foreign ministry , adding that it was more eager for a resolution than was the North 's military command . Mr Lee Hamilton , outgoing chairman of the House of Representatives foreign affairs committee , warned yesterday that Congress might delay a scheduled US oil shipment to Pyongyang so as to force the release of the pilot . The US is to provide 50,000 tons of heavy fuel oil , valued at about Dollars 4.7m ( Pounds 3m ) , to North Korea by January 21 as part of the October accord . However , the US is anxious not to jeopardise the hard-won agreement which appeared to remove the immediate threat of the North acquiring an offensive nuclear capability . There has been speculation here about a continuing internal power struggle in Pyongyang after the death last summer of Kim Il-sung ended 45 years of his authoritarian rule . Kim Jong-il , his son and successor , has been seen only intermittently in recent weeks .