Liberty Mutual , a US insurance company , is to invest in Lloyd 's of London , signalling continuing interest by corporate investors in the market . The news coincided with the publication by Lloyd 's of new rules which allow corporate members greater room for manoeuvre . The market , which won some Pounds 800m in corporate investment last year , is hoping to attract a further Pounds 125m to Pounds 250m in 1995 . Liberty , a Boston-based group , said its investment would allow Cater Allen Syndicate Management , an agency part of Cater Allen Holdings , to provide an extra Pounds 40m in capacity to Syndicate 190 , increasing its potential premium income to more than Pounds 70m next year . Management of the syndicate , will switch to a new agency next year , although this is dependent on the approval of the regulatory authorities at Lloyd 's . 'These arrangements reflect both Lloyd 's stated aims of broadening the market 's capital base and the recent trend towards corporate capital at Lloyd 's being provided on a dedicated basis to selected syndicates , ' said Mr Robin Gilkes , chairman of Cater Allen Syndicate Management . Separately Lloyd 's announced that corporate syndicates - ones which contain one member whose sole business is writing on that syndicate - will be permitted next year . So-called 'parallel syndicates ' , which will underwrite business alongside existing syndicates , will also be permitted . Other changes will allow corporate members to own up to 25 per cent of the agents which administer syndicates . New rules governing the conditions under which corporate member groups can acquire up to 100 per cent of managing agents will be published by the middle of next year . Lloyd 's also said that it would slow the planned introduction of 'assignment ' , a principle allowing Names to trade or transfer their participations on syndicates . The only form of assignment likely to be introduced in 1995 will be for Names re-arranging their affairs through Mapas , a kind of Lloyd 's unit trust , or a new kind of limited liability corporate vehicle , which is under consideration at the market . Existing rules , which limit corporate member groups to 50 per cent of a single syndicate 's capacity , and any one corporate member to no more than 25 per cent , will be waived 'only if managing agents demonstrate that individual members ' pre-emption and other rights have not been ignored ' .