The struggle for supremacy in the fast-changing multimedia business in Canada has intensified , with Rogers Communications proposing a 'strategic merger ' with Maclean Hunter . The outcome of what appears to be an unfolding battle for control of MH is likely to be decided only partly by what is good for each company's shareholders . Canadians can also expect to be bombarded over the next few weeks with opinions about how best to preserve some of their most treasured cultural icons , ranging from Maclean 's , Canadian answer to Time magazine , to a string of radio and television stations . Other weighty public policy issues will loom large in what Rogers is billing as Canada 's opportunity to create a company able to stand up to the muscle of such global multimedia behemoths as Time Warner , News Corporation and Bertelsmann . Rogers ' proposal is certain to spark a debate about the relative merits of concentration of ownership versus economies of scale in the media and cable-TV businesses . If foreign partners or predators become involved in the fray , as some analysts predict , Canadians will also be confronted with the vexing question of foreign involvement in the institutions which help define the differences between themselves and their southern neighbours . Rogers is expected to unveil details of its offer following a board meeting in Toronto this afternoon . It has already bought 8.3 per cent of MH 's 210m shares on the open market . To finance the cash part of its offer , Rogers has CDollars 700m ( USDollars 526.3m ) in cash on hand and is arranging credit lines of CDollars 2bn . It has indicated it will also include a parcel of its own non-voting shares in the bid . MH 's share price has shot up in anticipation of the offer , boosting its market capitalisation in the past two days from CDollars 2.85bn to about CDollars 3.5bn . MH 's US cable-television franchises in New Jersey , Michigan and Florida are alone estimated to be worth between Dollars 1.5bn and Dollars 2bn . These assets could play a decisive role in the looming battle . Mr Ted Rogers , founder , controlling shareholder and chief executive of the company which carries his name , says if his bid succeeds , he will sell the franchises to help pay down debt . However , MH said this week it had hired Goldman Sachs to explore the possibility of selling the cable-TV assets itself , 'with the objective of protecting and enhancing shareholder value ' . With an eye on the political ramifications of the deal , Mr Rogers wrapped himself in a figurative maple leaf when he unveiled his plans late on Wednesday . The aim of the 'strategic merger ' , he said , was to create ' a dynamic new Canadian multimedia company where the whole is obviously far stronger than the parts ' . The two companies combined have annual revenues of about CDollars 3bn . Their cable-TV systems cover more than 3m subscribers , and between them own 32 radio stations and a number of TV outlets . MH publishes about 250 magazines and trade journals , and owns 62 per cent of the Toronto Sun . Mr Rogers claimed a merger between Rogers and MH would act as a counterweight to Canada 's powerful telephone companies , as the lines between communications , media and entertainment become increasingly blurred . He already has a minority stake in Unitel , which is trying to break the established phone companies ' iron grip on the long-distance market . Mr Rogers held out the prospect of lower cable-TV fees as the two companies combined and rationalised their Canadian operations . Their cable systems make up more than a third of the total market , and several are contiguous . MH has so far reacted with typical caution to the approaches . It has noted that numerous regulatory approvals will be required . Its board 'will consider the proposal in light of its other strategic alternatives , and with a view to the best interests of MH and its shareholders ' . The question is already being raised as to whether a rock-solid repository of Canadian culture like Maclean Hunter should be allowed to fall into the hands of a restless entrepreneur like Mr Ted Rogers . A columnist wrote in yesterday 's Globe & Mail newspaper : 'It is hard to see what highly-indebted Rogers is bringing to the table - aside from yet another bridging loan from its patient bankers . Why could not Maclean Hunter reshape its own future , or turn around and swallow Mr Rogers whole ? '