Brand manufacturers intend to launch a series of court cases against supermarkets that sell lookalike products , having become convinced that a full-scale war with the big supermarket chains has become unavoidable . Their fears of sales being damaged by supermarket products packaged to resemble leading brands have been underlined by an NOP opinion poll published by the brand manufacturers . It shows that more than a fifth of all consumers purchased supermarkets ' own brands in the mistaken belief that they were purchasing a leading branded product . Mr John Murphy , chairman of the brand development company , Interbrand , and spokesman for the British Producers and Brand Owners Group , said the brand manufacturers felt that they had been exploited by supermarkets for too long . 'There are a series of other supermarket rip-off products in the pipeline , ' he said . 'But brand owners are now going to take on the retailers in a major way ' . He said the brand owners would be launching a series of lawsuits alleging that supermarkets were 'passing off ' in the packaging of their products . Coca-Cola is widely expected to initiate the legal campaign with a passing-off case against Sainsbury for allegedly infringing Coca-Cola's intellectual property rights with its 'Classic ' cola range of soft drinks . 'We have made our views known to Sainsbury ' , said Mr Peter Stokes of Coca-Cola . 'However , I can not comment on what further action we will take until our talks with the company are completed ' . Mr Murphy said Sainsbury was likely to be the target of several cases . Manufacturers might launch a case against the group in France , where the supermarket chain has recently opened a shop in Calais and where the legal restrictions on lookalikes are much tighter than in the UK . The NOP poll was conducted three weeks ago and involved interviews with 1,008 shoppers . Of these , 42 per cent said they had picked a supermarket's product off the shelf thinking it was a manufacturers ' brand , and 21 per cent said they had mistakenly bought a lookalike product . Equally worrying for the brand manufacturers is that 41 per cent believed - mistakenly - that supermarkets ' products were made by the manufacturers of the market-leading equivalents . The results seem to contradict an earlier MORI poll for the British Retail Consortium of 514 shoppers which found that 78 per cent said they never confused branded goods and the lookalike version . The brand owners ' group , which includes Procter & Gamble , Unilever , Nestle and Mars , has so far failed to persuade the government to amend the trade mark bill before parliament to introduce curbs on lookalike products .