North Korea has already developed five nuclear bombs and plans to build more , a senior North Korean defector claimed yesterday . Mr Kang Myong-do , a son-in-law of the North Korean prime minister , said the nuclear weapons programme was meant to protect the North against the US and South Korea . 'By possessing nuclear weapons , North Korea thinks it can be relieved from security worries and will be able to divert resources from the arms industry to agriculture and light industry , ' which could help rescue its shrinking economy . Mr Kang appeared at a news conference yesterday with Mr Cho Myong-chol , the son of a former construction minister , who defected last week . They are the two most senior North Korean officials to have fled to South Korea . South Korea 's decision to hold a press conference appears to be part of a renewed propaganda war between Seoul and Pyongyang following President Kim's death . Their appearance was almost certainly meant to embarrass North Korea as it celebrated Victory Day , which marks the end of the Korean war in 1953 . North Korea , which routinely claims that defectors have been kidnapped by Seoul , is likely to react strongly . The increased tensions between the two Koreas are reducing chances of a summit between their two leaders after it was postponed due to Mr Kim Il-sung 's death . Analysts are also interested in what effect Mr Kang 's defection will have on the future of Prime Minister Kang Song-san , the third-ranking official in North Korea . Mr Kang , whose arrival in Seoul from China in May was disclosed only yesterday , claimed the North 's nuclear policy was to make about 10 nuclear bombs before revealing their existence . Some analysts were sceptical about Mr Kang 's allegations . They expressed doubts about the North 's technical capability to assemble nuclear devices and the number of bombs claimed by Mr Kang . Mr Kim Jong-il , the new North Korean leader , 'is trying his utmost to postpone nuclear inspections until the North manufactures as many nuclear warheads as needed . By then , the US could not attack the North because of the North 's possession of nuclear bombs and could use them as a card in negotiations with the US to win diplomatic recognition and economic aid , ' he claimed . The US Central Intelligence Agency has estimated that North Korea has reprocessed enough plutonium to make one or two nuclear devices . Mr Kang 's claim that the North has acquired five nuclear bombs was based on a discussion he had with a senior security official at the Yongbyon nuclear complex . The two defectors expressed opposition to Mr Kim Jong-il 's recent assumption of power following the death of his father , President Kim Il-sung . But they said Mr Kim was in firm control of North Korea , having exercised extensive administrative powers since 1985 . However , food shortages and other economic problems threatened his rule , while the military was divided in its loyalty to him .