Nutmeg exporters in the two main producing countries have agreed on a plan to stabilise and then to increase world market prices for the spice , but have steered clear of recreating the cartel that collapsed six years ago . The agreement follows discussions between the Grenada Co-operative Nutmeg Association and 35 of the leading exporters in Indonesia , according to Grenadian officials . Indonesia produces about 75 per cent of the world's nutmeg , with the eastern Caribbean island having a 23 per cent share . 'We must have some type of continuing dialogue with Indonesia because we feel that Grenada can compete successfully on the international market once we do not have Indonesia dumping their nutmeg on the market at very low prices , ' said Mr Cliff Robertson , chairman of the Grenadian association . The recreation of the cartel , he said , would 'not be in Grenada 's interest ' . Industry officials said that , while not setting prices , the two producer groups would co-operate in monitoring the volume of nutmeg that was offered for sale on the world market . They were not expected to take the more radical step of destroying stocks and the anticipated improvement in prices would be gradual , the officials added . The new agreement has come after two years of discussions following a slump in prices . The fall has affected Grenada more as the island 's economy is more heavily dependent on the spice than Indonesia 's . Producers in the two countries would try to keep supplies to the world market at about 9,500 tonnes a year , marginally less than current world demand and 2,500 tonnes less than their current combined production , the industry sources said . When the cartel was established the Grenadian association and Aspin , the Indonesian producers ' group , agreed minimum prices for premium and lower grade nutmeg that were about four times higher than the going price of Dollars 1,000 . The cartel collapsed following changes in the Indonesian government's economic policy , which saw extensive deregulation . Aspin was deprived of the power to set prices and control supplies to the market and , much to the dismay of the Grenadians , increased Indonesian shipments pushed prices back to pre-cartel levels . Indonesian producers had now agreed with the Grenadians that an increase in the price of nutmeg was needed , said Mr Robertson . 'We agreed that the dialogue should be ongoing and we will meet again at the end of the year to discuss the progress of the market and see how best we can stabilise prices . '