An American research team has won the race for the most sought-after prize in science this year - isolating the gene that causes an inherited form of breast cancer . Dr Mark Scolnick and colleagues at the University of Utah have found the gene called BRCA1 , responsible for an estimated 3 to 5 per cent of breast cancers , ahead of a dozen other research groups in the US and Europe . The discovery was announced last night by the US research journal Science , which will publish details next month . At the same time , Science said an international team led by Dr Douglas Eaton of the Institute of Cancer Research in the UK was well down the road to isolating a second gene , BRCA2 , which probably causes another 3 to 5 per cent of breast cancers . Finding the two genes will enable scientists to develop tests that women with a family history of breast cancer can take , to discover whether they are individually at risk of developing an inherited form of the disease . Prototype tests for BRCA1 may be available within two years . Women who know they carry the genes will be able better to monitor themselves for early signs of cancer - or even have a mastectomy as a precaution . Those whose tests are negative , in spite of a family history , will be reassured . But scientists say the discoveries will eventually also help the 90 per cent of breast cancer patients whose disease is not inherited . Random mutations in the same genes are probably involved there too - and understanding the chemical processes by which BRCA1 and BRCA2 trigger cancer will help researchers develop drugs to treat the disease . 'These are very exciting stepping stones on the path to more effective treatment and diagnosis of breast cancer , ' said Dr Bruce Ponder , a UK Cancer Research Campaign scientist working at Cambridge University on cancer genes . 'But it 's important for people to realise that there are no immediate practical consequences . ' The search for breast cancer genes - described last year by Dr James Watson , a founder of modern genetics , as the most exciting story in medical science -has caught the scientific and popular imagination . The National Cancer Institute and the US Army have responded to health lobbyists by devoting many millions of dollars to the quest .