Two new systems for giving unit trusts star ratings are being introduced to Britain amid a flurry of criticism . London Business School professor of finance Elroy Dimson , and Peter Jeffreys , managing director of the widely respected analyst Fund Research , are both vehement critics of the new ratings , which are being published by measurement services Micropal and Morningstar . They are worried that the ratings will be treated as 'best buy ' labels and could also be used in advertisements to mislead the public . Dimson says : 'There is no question of there being high levels of predictability in these rankings . ' The star ratings are based on risk-adjusted performance figures . These are a more sophisticated version of the conventional performance tables , which measure different trusts ' total return over various periods of time . The conventional tables take no account of the fact that some trusts take greater risks than others and that their progress is , correspondingly , more volatile . This volatility can be measured by statistical yardsticks such as the standard deviation . Both Micropal and Morningstar have their own methods of adjusting a fund's performance for its risk . In very broad terms , such adjustments penalise a very risky fund and reward one that is very steady . The stars are intended to encapsulate the net risk/reward relationship . Funds with the highest overall score get five stars ; those with the lowest , one . But statistics relating to past performance are of little use in predicting how funds will do in future . Dimson argues that risk-adjusted performance figures have no more predictive power than conventional performance figures . Advertisements from unit trust groups already use conventional performance figures as part of their sales pitch . The attacks on the star ratings took place at a recent FT Roundtable . Others taking part were Chris Poll and Keith Sheffield , who run UK statistical services Micropal and HSW respectively ; James Coursey , who is UK editor of Morningstar ; and John Cuthbert , a freelance fund analyst . The Roundtable was chaired by Barry Riley , investment editor of the FT. Edited extracts of the discussion appear below . POLL : The flaw in conventional five-year performance figures is that they have only two common factors - what the price was five years ago and what it is today , with nothing about what went on in between . They do not give you the basis for any sort of qualitative evaluation whatsoever . But people are using these figures to draw conclusions and make recommendations . At the end of the day , what do we all want ? We want more people investing in stock markets , either directly or indirectly through funds . And we want to educate the public . DIMSON : I do n't know who 'we ' is . POLL : The unit trust industry . DIMSON : But that is a million miles away from where the industry is . What the industry does is to make promises of performance in which past performance is extrapolated through to the future . They build in part on data drawn from your services , making sometimes implicit and sometimes explicit claims of the most outrageous nature about the predictability of their returns . They would be outrageous whether they take a price five years ago and a price today or whether they take the period in between . They would be outrageous whether they look at returns embracing data in between or embracing volatility . POLL : With commercialism , you 're never going to stop people making claims . SHEFFIELD : I 'm not convinced that historical performance is even a relevant starting point to future performance - partly because it fails to take account of the market conditions under which we achieved that performance . Historical performance tables have been useful in exposing the public to the risks : the fact that some funds underperform others dramatically over certain periods of time . But you ca n't form total judgments from the collation of numbers . You need a mixture of numbers and qualitative appraisal . CUTHBERT : I find this argument bizarre . You are saying that you have this historical world and you ca n't do anything with it in future . Does n't this imply that you ca n't pick good managers - or even that there are n't good managers ? DIMSON : There is no dispute that there is a slight persistence in performance at the bottom end : poor performers have slightly more than their fair share of being poor performers in the following period . So , there is something to be learnt from looking at the data . And it is appropriate for individuals to know what 's been happening to their unit trust . But those are different functions from spotting a money manager who 's going to be better than all other money managers . CUTHBERT : I think we may be missing something . We have a problem relating past performance to future performance . But that does not necessarily mean that we have a problem measuring managerial ability . And if we can measure managerial ability - even though that process does not have predictive content - it may still be rational to pick managers who have shown more managerial ability than others in the past . SHEFFIELD : I agree with some of your analysis , John . But I feel the conclusions take us into dangerous territory . The danger is that a 'good' fund manager will be expected to perform well in future . RILEY : How should star ratings be used ? POLL : What we 're trying to say by introducing star ratings is ' . . . in addition to performance , is there another measure that will give an indication of how that fund performs ? ' The star rating system says ' . . . if you 've got five , it 's either an excessive performance and excessive risk or medium performance with medium risk ' . We also spell out what the volatility is , separately . The star rating goes out as part of a sheet on every fund which gives you a variety of quantitative information . But the problem is that if you just put the basic components of the star rating system down - the average investor won't understand it . We are not trying to say that the star rating system has predictive ability ; we are just trying to identify the characteristics of different funds . COURSEY : It is important to make sure the star rating appears in context . We have a statement that the star rating is an introduction , not a conclusion . If you had a portfolio consisting only of funds with five stars and sold them when the ratings went down to four stars , your portfolio would not perform well . SHEFFIELD : Do you put your customers ( the unit trust management groups ) under any contractual obligation as to how they use your star ratings ? Because the advertisements will appear - as you know - saying 'Morningstar five-star rating , Micropal five-star rating ' . Do you explain that the star ratings really must be related to other information ? POLL : We have a 20-page user guide which spells this out . Whether this is going to be effective is a different question . Any star system is open to abuse . Anything 's open to abuse . SHEFFIELD : Whatever you say here , the star ratings will actually be used if you publish them . POLL : But there is so much information published at the moment that is more misleading - five-year performance tables and so on . DIMSON : I feel you are all conniving . You are on your own side and so you are on your customers ' side . There is no question of there being high levels of predictability in these rankings . You need something like 25 years ' data to conclude that someone has superior capabilities which persist over time . One ca n't say that star ratings based on three-year or five-year performance are not helpful - people must have information that tells them what has gone on in the past . But the implication that these are good-quality funds to invest in for the future is overstated . POLL : I 'm not saying it is predictive , I 'm saying it is informative . RILEY : So , should we give up and say there is no connection between the past and the future except for the dud funds ? POLL : What we are saying is that there is a balance between risk and reward and there is a relationship . The star is not doing any more than encapsulating that relationship . DIMSON : I 've heard the Consumers ' Association explain the same thing . They say : 'You look down this column and you can see how long the wash cycle is , this one and the number of choices of different temperatures . You do n't have to look for the best buy ' . But , in fact , they labelled it the 'Best Buy ' . You make it clear your stars are n't the 'Best Buy ' . . . but it 's terribly tempting . JEFFREYS : You would not dream of producing a star rating system based just on cumulative relative performance , and risk-adjusted returns are no more predictive than those . That 's the killer . DIMSON : All my Peps are in the Gartmore index fund . I put my money where my mouth is . This article is part of an edited transcript of a discussion which took place at the Financial Times on October 12 .