Microsoft 's share price dropped sharply yesterday when the software company announced a further delay in the launch of Windows 95 , a long-awaited new version of the Windows personal computer program . Microsoft said that shipping of the product may be delayed until August . It had been expected to ship in May or June and already has been delayed by more than a year . The postponement is expected to put off the launch of Microsoft 's planned on-line service , the Microsoft Network . The delay reflects Microsoft 's 'continued commitment to deliver a vigorously tested product of the highest quality ' , the company said . The announcement came in the wake of the discovery of a flaw in Intel's Pentium microprocessor , and Microsoft 's disclosure that the calculator program in the current version of Windows is prone to errors . 'We have always said we will ship this product when it is ready , and that is what we are committed to do , ' said Mr Brad Silverberg , senior vice-president of Microsoft 's Personal Systems division . A pre-release version of Windows 95 has been shipped to more than 48,000 testers , Microsoft said . The testing program will be expanded this spring . 'Feedback from our current beta testers has been excellent , they love the product , but given the sheer breadth of Windows 95 , shipping it may take us longer than we had originally anticipated , ' Mr Silverberg added . Analysts called the delay 'disappointing ' but noted that Windows 95 faces little competition and that launching the product without thorough 'bug fixing ' could be more damaging . It is not yet clear , however , whether any significant flaws have been found in prototype versions . Mr Mike Brown , Microsoft 's chief financial officer , said : 'Our top priority is to deliver a high quality , reliable product , rather than trying to meet targets for revenues from the product in any particular quarter . ' Microsoft has said that it expected to sell as many as 20m copies of Windows 95 in the first 12 months after the program is introduced . Microsoft shares dropped by more than 4 per cent to Dollars 59 7/8 at the close yesterday , from Monday 's close of Dollars 62 5/8 .