For years Japan 's entertainment industry has been trying to reach out to a western audience , sending its starlets on a mission to perform in Las Vegas and Hollywood . But such efforts have been big flops . Now , however , the industry has discovered Asia . Along with the country's manufacturers , Japanese record companies , television networks and artist management groups are turning to the rapidly growing Asian market . Masahisa Aizawa , vice-president of Sun Music , a Japanese production agency , says the entertainment industry in Asia has not caught up with the rapid economic growth and the deluge of electronic hardware . 'Asia 's entertainment industry is behind Japan by about 15 years , ' he says . Sun Music was surprised at the popularity of Noriko Sakai , one of its Japanese pop idols , among Taiwanese teenagers . Sakai recently became top pin-up star in Taiwan , prompting the agency to work with a Taiwanese television network to produce a drama starring the idol . Until recently , Japan has been excessively cautious about exporting entertainment software to Asia . Many of the older people in south-east Asian countries still remember being forced to learn Japanese by the Japanese army in the second world war , and South Korea still bans Japanese songs and literature from its stores . Younger Asians , however , crave news out of Tokyo . 'Tokyo is for Asia what New York was for Japan 20 years ago , ' says Eisuke Saito , managing director of Amuse , another production agency , which organised concerts by Japanese artists in Beijing last year . Such is the demand that video tapes of Japanese television programmes are sold in Taiwan video shops , Japanese soap operas are aired in Singapore and Japanese songs sung on karaoke machines . Harry Kaneko of Pony Canyon , a Japanese record company , believes that the Dollars 1bn ( Pounds 600m ) record market in Asia will grow threefold in the next seven years . In contrast , marked growth in Japan 's Dollars 4bn record market is unlikely . Japanese entertainment-related companies are keen to cash in on such demand , and stress that there is little room for western corporations . 'Japan is closer than the US or Europe , and besides , similar physique of the Japanese people brings us closer to Asia than Caucasians , ' says Aizawa . He also claims the rhythm and melody lines of songs in south-east Asia are basically the same . Aside from bringing Japanese talent to Asia , the Japanese are eager to capture the Chinese-speaking market including Taiwan , Hong Kong , Singapore , Malaysia and Thailand , by offering Chinese artists . Saito reckons the global Chinese-speaking population totals some 1.6bn . Many in the industry point out that Hong Kong and Taiwan are important strategic areas for subsidiaries to distribute software throughout south-east Asia . Pony Canyon is building a network in Asia to search for potential Asian pop and rock stars . Japanese production agencies are searching for talent in China to sell to the Chinese communities . Production agency HoriPro , teamed with a Hong Kong agency , recently organised a nationwide amateur talent search contest in China . Events organised by local television stations were held in 19 regional cities . The semifinals and finals were held in Beijing , and broadcast live to other parts of Asia through Hong Kong 's satellite Star TV . Kazutaka Hori , vice-president of HoriPro , explains that the project was also backed by the Chinese authorities , since 'China never really had its own stars and artists . They all came from Hong Kong and Taiwan ' . Amuse has also arranged a contest , with the finals to be held this month . 'We want to train and bring up people with talent for the Asian market , ' says Saito . Exporting Japanese software and know-how in the entertainment business has struck a chord with the Japanese hardware makers . Matsushita Electric Industrial is using Sakai of Sun Music to sell its electronic products in China and south-east Asia , while other consumer electronics companies are lining up to become sponsors of the China talent search contests . A concern in the Japanese entertainment market is the absence of copyright protection in the region . Although China is trying to improve its enforcement of copyright law , more than 800 companies produce pirate cassette tapes . Others , such as some Taiwanese companies , have been blamed for distorting the legitimate market . Japanese companies , however , see the advantage of establishing themselves in the region before this problem is solved . 'Once proper laws on copyright are laid out , there will be profits that did not exist before , ' says Hori .