Fearful of becoming irretrievably ensnared in China 's web , Taiwan is attempting to slow development of cross-strait ties to win time to build support for its attempts to rejoin the international community . In its first white paper on China policy , to be released today , the government is expected to advocate a go-slow approach to the rapprochement launched with historic talks between the two sides in Singapore in April 1993 . After seven years ' detente , the paper comes amid a sharp escalation in cross-strait tensions since the March 31 deaths of 24 Taiwanese tourists in China 's Zhejiang Province . While Taiwan business backs closer ties with China , most Taiwanese remain profoundly distrustful of Beijing 's leaders . The tourist killings played into the hands of President Lee Teng-hui , who is using the incident to further his agenda of getting the world to recognise Taiwan as an independent sovereign state , observers say . It is rumoured among Taipei politicians that shortly after Mr Lee became president following the death of Mr Chiang Ching-kuo in 1988 , opposition leaders asked him to seek formal Taiwanese independence from China . Mr Lee is said to have replied : 'Just give me time ' . The story may be apocryphal , but Mr Lee 's record speaks for itself . The Taiwan-born agricultural economist built up a power base from virtually nil , presided over a transition to democracy and in early 1993 shoved off the political stage the military-backed mainlanders who ran the country for over 40 years . Weeks later , he launched a campaign to rejoin the UN , which Taiwan left in 1972 , after that body switched recognition to Beijing . In the past year , he and his ministers have globe-trotted constantly , trying to drum up international support for entry into the UN and other multilateral bodies from which Taiwan has long been excluded because of China 's objections . Taipei maintains full diplomatic relations with 29 countries . Beijing threatens to break off ties with any country which formally recognises Taipei . As a permanent member of the UN security council , it can veto Taiwan 's entry . But Mr Lee 's tactics are causing consternation , not only in Beijing , which views the island as a renegade province , but also in Washington , Taiwan 's closest ally and benefactor . 'Taiwan has turned into a kind of Frankenstein 's monster , ' observes Mr Parris Chang , a lawmaker from the pro-independence opposition Democratic Progressive party ( DPP ) . 'The US fostered Taiwan 's democratic development and some might say the policy worked too well . Now the US has to live with the consequences . ' The US strategy seems to be simply to wait . The Clinton administration recently completed a comprehensive review of US policy toward Taiwan , the first in 15 years . Minor though symbolically important changes in the US stance are expected to be announced shortly . But there will be no change in the US 's 'one-China ' policy dating from the late 1970s acknowledging Beijing 's claim over Taiwan . Taiwan now experiences a cacophony of views on the island 's identity and future . The debate is further shrouded by a haze of rhetoric emanating from the government . Because China threatens to use force should Taiwan declare independence , the ruling Nationalist party , or Kuomintang , persists in larding its assertions that 'the Republic of China on Taiwan is a sovereign state ' with dubious claims that its 'transitional two-China policy ' is a interim measure whose ultimate goal is reunification . 'The Republic of China on Taiwan is already an independent nation by whatever definition , ' says Mr Hanson Chien , the KMT spokesman . 'There 's no need to antagonise the PRC and invite a war . ' Public opinion is divided . A government-commissioned survey in late June found 12 per cent of Taiwanese support independence , 21 per cent support reunification , and 56 per cent prefer to maintain the status quo . A Gallup poll conducted shortly after the tourist killings showed support for independence at an all-time high of 27 per cent . 'China should realise the only reason more people do n't openly support Taiwan 's independence is because they are afraid China will attack , not because they want reunification , ' says Ms Maysing Yang , head of the DPP's foreign affairs department . About the only matter on which there is a national consensus is that Taiwan should rejoin the UN , and is it on this aim that President Lee appears to have staked his hopes . Ultimately the US will play a decisive role in Taiwan 's future , says Mr Wang Chien-shien of the KMT-breakaway Chinese New party . 'It is in the US's long-term interest to have an independent Taiwan . Some day , when it suits their purposes , the US will play the Taiwan card against China . Now the time is not mature . ' By March 1996 at the latest , Taiwan will hold direct presidential elections for the first time . Mr Lee 's popularity makes him likely to win should he run . It is easy to dismiss a country whose leader was installed by a waning military dictatorship , but harder to exclude one whose leader is democratically elected .