The annual rate of growth in M4 , the broadest measure of money supply , fell towards the lower end of the government 's target range in October , official figures showed yesterday . The Bank of England said M4 , comprising bank deposits , bank lending and all other forms of money , grew 3.8 per cent in the year to October . This was the lowest rate for almost a year , and towards the bottom of the government 's target inflation for M4 of between 3 per cent and 9 per cent . Measured on a seasonally adjusted basis , the annual growth rate was 3.9 per cent . The size of the drop yesterday surprised the City , which had previously predicted an unadjusted annual growth rate of 4.5 per cent . In September the unadjusted annual growth rate was 4.8 per cent . The key reason for the drop was subdued growth in the level of bank lending . Total sterling lending by the main British banks to the UK private sector rose Pounds 610m in October . Although this was higher than the very low increase in September , it was below the previous six-monthly average of Pounds 712m . Borrowing by companies fell in the month as the corporate sector continued to repay bank debts accrued before and during the recession . Manufacturers repaid Pounds 233m in October and financial companies Pounds 341m . Lending to the personal sector grew by Pounds 759m in October , a slightly higher level than in the previous month . But although consumer credit rose quite strongly , mortgage lending rose at a slower rate than in recent months . The Treasury said that another reason for the drop in M4 's annual growth rate was that the third tranche of British Telecom shares had depressed bank deposits . Meanwhile , corporation tax payments had been higher this October , compared with last October , partly as a result of new initiatives to persuade companies to spread tax payments throughout the year . The Treasury said the drop in M4 suggested that companies had chosen to pay this corporation tax through their deposits , rather than by taking on new borrowing .