The possibility that Mr Kim Jong-il , son of the late President Kim Il-sung , will be named North Korean president and head of the ruling party next week after the 100-day mourning for his father may remove uncertainty over the extent of the new leader 's control in Pyongyang . Statements by North Korean officials referring to Mr Kim as the 'supreme leader ' led diplomats to believe a turning point may soon be reached in nuclear talks between the US and North Korea , which resumed at high level in Geneva on Wednesday after a five-day break . 'With no one in confident overall command , it is most unlikely North Korean officials would take responsibility for reaching agreement , ' said a western diplomat . 'To have a properly appointed leader must be a step forward . ' Diplomats expressed caution over Mr Kim 's influence on the talks , saying it was impossible to predict whether he would take the same hard line as his father or a more conciliatory one . Negotiations centre on an international aid package to switch North Korea 's nuclear programme from graphite-moderated reactors to safer light-water versions . In a preliminary accord reached on August 12 , Pyongyang agreed to freeze its nuclear programme in return for light-water technology and diplomatic ties with Washington . But , in talks since then , North Korean officials have put up a series of new demands which Washington calls unacceptable . The talks have been consistently described as 'serious and businesslike ' by both sides , but many observers fear North Korea is simply seeking to gain time to pursue its nuclear ambitions and stave off economic sanctions . Reports from Washington say the Clinton administration has decided not to give ground to Pyongyang but to maintain its August offer and hope this will eventually be accepted . With American forces engaged in Haiti and mid-term elections next month , the US has no interest in precipitating a confrontation . AlThough North Korea denies a nuclear weapons programme , it continues to refuse access to two suspected nuclear waste sites at the Yongbyon nuclear complex . The International Atomic Energy Agency believes inspection of these sites could provide clues to what has happened to plutonium missing from an experimental 5MW nuclear reactor . In last week 's Geneva talks Mr Kang Sok-ju , North Korea 's first deputy foreign minister , apparently rejected even a rough timetable for such inspections which the US insists must be part of any final deal . Other unresolved issues concern the roughly 8,000 spent reactor-fuel rods in a holding pond at Yongbyon which the US wants shipped out of the country , and North Korea 's demands for cash compensation for ending its graphite-moderated reactor programme .