The international benchmark prices for 1995 iron ore deliveries settled by BHP in Japan on Wednesday go some way to make up the drop suffered by miners this year . The reaction of BHP 's fellow suppliers , however , has been less than enthusiastic . The details are that iron ore fines prices , on an fob basis , will rise by 5.8 per cent for deliveries to Japan from April l next year . The new BHP fines price is 27.15 cents for each 1 per cent of pure Fe content ( or , per dry long ton unit ) . The new lump ore price of 33 cents a lont ton unit represents an increase of 7.9 per cent and gives BHP a rough overall price rise for its Japanese deliveries of 6.9 per cent . Most miners had been hoping for the fines price to rise by a high single-digit percentage . BHP ranks as the second largest Australian iron ore supplier to Japan after CPA 's Hamersley Iron . In 1994 its Japanese shipments are likely to total about 11m tonnes - 800,000 tonnes higher than the minimum it contracted to supply during 1994 . Its minimum contractual tonnage in the 1995 fiscal year will be 13.6m tonnes . By settling before Hamersley BHP regained some of the clout as an iron ore supplier that it lost when a wall collapsed at its Mt Whaleback mine in 1989 and the company had to declare force majeure . The settlement also established a new record premium in Japan for lump over fines of 8.74 cents . Lump ore makes up just over half of BHP 's Japanese deliveries . To many in the ore trade , however , the fact that BHP has recently been supplying more than its minimum obligation in what is supposed to be a disastrous financial year for the Japanese mills indicates that the suppliers could have got higher prices . It is true that Japanese steel MilIs have been heavily lossmaking until very recently , but there are undeniable signs of recovery . Japanese crude steel output in November was 15 per cent higher than in November 1993 . In the latter half of 1994 , iron ore consumers , especially in Europe , have been concerned about running short of higher grade lump and pellet . Unlike fines , these grades are directly chargeable to the blast furnace and do not require sintering . European steelmakers , especially in Benelux and Scandinavia , are closing their sinter plants for environmental reasons , adding to the pressure on direct-charge ores . Steelmakers , which in Europe and Japan tend not to have direct stakes in iron ore mines , are often accused of ignoring the necessity of allowing miners a reasonable return on investment . In the economically sluggish years since 1990 iron ore prices have fallen . Miners are nowadays frequently heard to say that prices are returns are insufficient to justify the expansions or developments of new capacity needed to ensure healthy supply in the future . Analysts believe supplies of lump and pellet will be tight throughout 1995 , with fines remaining in balance . Investment may not be taking place in large greenfield mine developments , but there have been just about enough expansions or capacity replacements to cover short-term consumption . Hamersley 's new Marandoo mine in Western Australia and the M'haoudat mine in Mauritania are among the most significant such developments this year . China 's continuing hunger for imported iron ore was witnessed in the opening by Portman Mining of a new joint venture mine at Koolyanobbing in Western Australia dedicated entirely to supplying China . In addition Venezuela 's CVG opened a 3m-tonnes-a-year pelletising plant last month . In April 1995 LKAB of Sweden plans to inaugurate its 4m-tonne pelletiser at Kiruna . Until ore prices improve sufficiently to allow large-scale investment for the blast furnace market , the ore industry 's attention will be focused on developing direct-charge products for the direct reduced iron sector . DRI is the fastest growing area in iron making , because the various DR technologies are beginning to prove themselves as viable alternatives to traditional blast furnace-based steelworks . Smaller scale , cleaner plants can be built at a fraction of the cost of the traditional works . Already this year the leading US mini-mill , Nucor Corp , has opened the world 's first iron carbide plant in Trinidad . BHP is also on the point of approving the construction of an export-oriented hot briquetted iron plant in western Australia . India has built a 5m-tonnes-a-year DRI industry in the last few years . Further investments in DRI have been announced in South Korea , Venezuela and Bahrain . The volume of iron ore consumed in DR iron making is still small compared with the blast furnace sector . The total seaborne trade in iron ore this year has been estimated at 368m tonnes . Annual world production of DRI has only just topped 2.5m tonnes , but the demand for DR-grade ores is likely to double in the next few years . Prices for DR-grade ores look set to outstrip those in the blast furnace sector . The fact that scrap consuming mini-mills such as Nucor , which are the fastest growing steelmakers in the world , are themselves beginning to invest in the new iron making processes spells hope for the iron ore industry in the long term . Bob Jones is a deputy editor of Metal Bulletin magazine .