Sir , There are sound economic reasons why consumers need to be given consistent and accurate information if they are to make efficient choices about transport ( 'Fading blueprint of a greener world ' , January 26 ) . Unfortunately , the chapter of Professor Pearce 's book , Measuring Sustainable Development , which deals with transport makes two fundamental errors . These invalidate his conclusions that road transport fails to pay for its full costs . First , government tax revenues from road transport were Pounds 23bn last year , not the Pounds 14.7bn which he cites . It is true that many motoring taxes are in forms which do not help motorists ' understanding of transport costs since they do not in many cases relate to usage . A motoring tax system based on use rather than ownership and purchase of vehicles would improve economic and environmental efficiency . The total tax-take is already sufficient to meet the full costs but a reform of the tax structure should relate tax more closely to usage . Second , Professor Pearce includes congestion costs as an external cost of the road transport system . This is not the case . While it is true that congestion costs are highly wasteful and should be reduced , they are inflicted by motorists on one another not on non-road users . Congestion costs are therefore internal costs which have already been paid for by road users in lost time and extra fuel used . To require motorists to pay these charges again would amount to massive double counting . If these factors are taken into account then , using Professor Pearce's figures , road taxes exceed road costs by Pounds 6bn . Motoring costs are not twice the amount 'fetched by road taxes ' . There is , in fact , no objective basis for any increase in the overall taxation level from road use though the structure of existing taxes and other motoring costs could be improved significantly . It is also the case that fewer people are killed and injured on Britain's roads than previously , though still not few enough . Air pollution from vehicles is declining rapidly as new cars are fitted with catalysts and vehicles are becoming quieter . Most of the social costs associated with road transport are in fact falling . Mike Hollingsworth , chief economist , The Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders , Forbes House , Halkin Street , London SW1X 7DS From Mr Paul Everitt . Sir , The assertion that road users do not pay enough for the use of Britain 's road network is undermined by a number of significant omissions ( 'Fading blueprint of a greener world ' ) . Not only does it underestimate the existing tax burden by some Pounds 7bn , but completely ignores the existence of significant benefits that accrue from road use . Surely we should look at the value of having more than 2m people employed in the road transport sector , or the increased leisure and work opportunities that road use allows Britain 's citizens . How much value do we place on the availability of fresh produce and product choice in our shops at prices that can be afforded ? Increasing the cost of road use will have a direct impact on the cost of living of individuals and the profitability of British industry . Road pricing will have much wider social and economic impacts than is recognised by Professor Pearce and a balance sheet that ignores them represents an incomplete analysis . Paul Everitt , assistant director , British Road Federation , Pillar House , 194-202 Old Kent Road , London SE1 5TG