There is no such thing as safe drinking , the World Health Organisation declared yesterday . It launched a strong attack on ' a campaign which for some time has been trying to give the impression that moderate alcohol consumption could be good for health ' . According to Mr Hans Emblad , the Swedish director of WHO 's substance abuse programme , there is 'no minimum threshold below which alcohol can be consumed without any risk ' . The message should be 'the less you drink , the better ' . The warning provoked a furious counter-attack from alcohol researchers . 'WHO 's statement is out of date and has not taken account of many recent findings , ' said Sir Richard Doll , honorary consultant at the Imperial Cancer Research Fund unit in Oxford . He was principal author of a study published last month showing that a couple of drinks a day do more good than harm for middle-aged and elderly men . 'This is the usual set of knee-jerk opinions from the WHO - and scientifically they are wrong , ' said Mr John Duffy , director of statistics at Edinburgh University 's Alcohol Research Unit . The WHO listed a catalogue of woes associated with alcohol - cancers and chronic liver diseases , dependence , accidents , risky sex , suicides , family problems , violence and crime . The reduction in risk of heart disease , it said , relates to very low consumption levels - of the order of one drink every other day - and applies only to men over 35 and post-menopausal women . Mr Duffy , on the other hand , said yesterday that men drinking 20 to 30 units ( a glass of wine equals one unit ) a week had the lowest mortality rates in Britain . Mr Emblad said studies showing that low alcohol consumption helped prevent heart disease were being misused for 'commercial purposes ' to promote the idea that drinking in moderation is good for health . Mr Duffy said in the real world there were political interests keen to promote the idea that all drinking is bad - notably the state alcohol monopolies in Nordic countries wanting to use the health argument to protect their markets against cheap imports .