An aviation insurance broker who claimed she was sacked after spurning the advances of a senior manager won Pounds 18,000 in damages yesterday in her case which alleged sexual discrimination and unfair dismissal . Miss Samantha Phillips , a broker for Willis Corroon , won Pounds 13,500 in damages for unfair dismissal and Pounds 4,500 in damages for injury to feelings after an industrial tribunal in Croydon , south London , said the company 'would not have acted so unfavourably in the case of a male ' . The tribunal awarded Miss Phillips only 75 per cent of full damages for unfair dismissal because it said she 'behaved unwisely , foolishly and irresponsibly ' . It also ruled that Mr Giles Wilkinson , head of production at Willis Corroon , had not acted improperly during a business trip to Denmark in 1992 . Miss Phillips had claimed he made unwanted advances in a hotel bar . In delivering the tribunal 's verdict , Mr David Milton , panel chairman , criticised Willis Corroon for a 'litany of defects ' in its disciplinary procedure , which did not allow Miss Phillips to appeal after she was sacked in 1992 for gross misconduct . The company said she was fired because she misled LA Hudson , a Lloyd's underwriting syndicate , about whether any other dealers had been approached to quote prices for a contract . Miss Phillips denied the charges and claimed there had been a strategy to oust her from the company in order to save face with the underwriter . The tribunal determined that Willis Corroon did not give Miss Phillips any time to defend herself against allegations of misconduct . Mr Milton said the company would not have taken a 'steamroller attitude , catapulting her out the door ' , if she had been a man . But the tribunal said Miss Phillips should have known that Willis Corroon would have been seeking insurance quotes from other underwriters in addition to LA Hudson . Miss Phillips said the whole affair had ruined her life but that she felt vindicated by the tribunal 's decision . Willis Corroon said it was disappointed with the tribunal 's findings , which did not uphold its view that Miss Phillips was fired because 'she acted in disregard of the total honesty and trust between broker and underwriter ' . The Equal Opportunities Commission said it was pleased with the outcome of the hearing . Male camaraderie , Page 5