The beggar-girl was enchantingly beautiful . She must have been at least six years old . 'Give me shampoo ] ' she pleaded , seemingly close to tears . 'Give me lipstick , give me soaps , ' and she tugged again at our camera-straps . I reflected that the beggars of Madurai had become more sophisticated since I was last there : the younger generation was targetting the tourists in four-star-hotel language , perhaps because it had discovered that foreigners are now implored by everybody - by guidebooks and travel agents and aid workers - not to listen to the pleas of India 's beggar hordes . Give a cheque to the charities , they all say : that is the most efficient way you can help . But the beggars are usually not beautiful . There was an old man hobbling behind the girl who wanted to show me something revolting on the end of the stump of his arm . He did n't want shampoo ; he was determined on rupees . We struggled on through the crowd and surrendered our shoes to another old man , this time for safe- keeping while we entered the Hindu temple , and we were secretly relieved when our guide dispersed the crowd for a few seconds with a flurry of gestures and curses . This is one of the phenomena - one of the eternal truths - of India which alarms the first-time visitor . How will we cope with the poverty ? Is it true that there are babies dying on the pavements ? What are we supposed to do when we are surrounded by a score of frantic , pleading , ragged and horribly deformed children ? The question - the problem - can present itself at a higher and moral level . Here am I , spending a ( comparative ) fortune on my own pleasure , enjoying the luxury of sophisticated hotels in order to seek out the glories of a supreme civilisation , while out there on the street - I glimpse them from my air-conditioned taxi - my fellow-beings are suffering a misery which is incomprehensible to , let alone endurable by , a European . It is a topic which invariably comes up in dinner-party talk . There is no shortage of people , not just those of excessive sensitivity , whose holiday has been ruined by the sights they have seen on their very first drive from Bombay airport to the luxuriance of the Taj Hotel . Because India , of all the countries and cultures and civilisations of this world , most deserves the effort , I have a suggestion : Start off in Goa . It is India made easy . Goa , unlike India proper , is green , well-fed , clean ( up to a point ) , accessible , Christian , cosmopolitan . It also has an English-speaking , efficient and fast-expanding tourist industry . It is picturesque , it has wonderful beaches , a splendid and unoppressive climate , and it is still pretty cheap . The local cuisine is delicious and distinctive ; it even makes its own wine ( yes , well . . . ) . No wonder it is in the vanguard of the Indian government 's tourist plans . Goa has not always been a favoured British destination . Because it was Portuguese from the early 16th century until the peace-loving Nehru sent in his army in 1961 , it did not figure in the favoured itineraries of the Raj , like Kashmir , the Taj Mahal , Rajasthan and the Elephanta Caves . All that has changed , and Goa is certain to continue its charter-driven boom of visitors from Europe , particularly from Britain . Most of the tourists come for the beaches , which , to repeat , are wonderful and not spoiled at all by 'hippy colonies ' ( much exaggerated ) or never-ending offers from the locals of massage or handicrafts or coconuts . These locals are not touts in the Mediterranean sense , irritating and intrusive . I have one happy memory of an enormously fat and good-tempered Australian under the parasol next to mine , being persuaded by a group of passing youths to pose with them for a photograph because , they told him , their village would not otherwise believe that anyone of his size could exist . They then gave him a bunch of flowers . The sea and the sand and the climate of Goa are of the best . But Goa is worth journeying above the high-tide mark . The Portuguese colonial presence produced an attractive local architectural style as well as a Christian tradition . These come together most dramatically in the semi-deserted town of Old Goa , inland through the rice paddies from the present capital of Panaji . It is an essential excursion even for beach fanatics . Old Goa boasts , under the dedicated though poverty-stricken guardianship of the Architectural Survey of India , a collection of remarkable episcopal and civic buildings that dates from the 16th century . In the mid-19th century the Portuguese rulers retreated from Old Goa 's diseases and moved downstream to Panaji . Today Old Goa 's hottest draw is the mummified and 'miraculously preserved ' body of St Francis Xavier , the Jesuit who arrived in 1542 , went on to continue his mission work in China , and asked to be returned in death to his beloved Goa . He rests there today , his unravaged face visible through a glass plate in the Basilica Bom Jesus . By ancient tradition his body is taken into the cathedral on rare occasions when the devout - Hindus as well as Roman Catholics , pilgrims from around the world as well as locals - gather in their millions to venerate him . This exposition is to happen again this year , apparently for the final time because the corpse , at long last , is shrinking at an embarrassing rate . It is going to be an enormous affair and , if you are not one of the above-mentioned devout , you would be well-advised to steer clear . Do not assume that you find only an untypical Christian culture in this part of India . Although Portuguese rule obliged the Hindus to build their temples inland and on a modest scale , you can get a fascinating introduction to that religion on a scale less overwhelming and intimidating than in the enormous temple complexes in the south . This explosion of tourism must be particularly welcome to the Goans - an outward-looking people who have traditionally emigrated all over the world - because they have to face up to the decline of their local iron ore exports . But the boom carries with it all the usual dangers , so well demonstrated elsewhere in the world 's beautiful places - pollution , falling standards , ribbon development , crime , environmental destruction and so on . The encouraging news is that Goa seems to be enforcing planning controls more rigorously than elsewhere in India , with the prime aim of protecting the beaches . This has to be noted , as well as applauded , by the tourist . For example , when leafing through the travel trade 's brochures you need to know that for some years hoteliers have been required to build several hundred metres behind the sea-line . This splendid rule means that many of Goa 's hotels are set back from , and out of sight of , the ocean , which is not always clear from the travel agents ' purple prose . Watch out for those give-away phrases like only five minutes ' walk from the sand . My recommendation is that you consider splashing out on one of the older ( and more expensive ) hotels which does have a seashore position , while consoling yourself with the thought that airfares have become ridiculously cheap . For instance , any good travel agent or bucket-shop will get you on to a charter flight direct to Goa , saving the hassle of transitting through Bombay or Delhi and the subsequent scrimmage on Indian Airlines . You then throw away any vouchers for a guest-house on a coconut plantation and set off at once to a room at - say - the Fort Aguada . I promise that the Fort Aguada Beach Resort , owned by the Taj Group , is very good indeed , and I judged it by the highest international standards . It stands above the sea at one end of the wonderful sweep of Calangute Beach . After it was built , in 1974 , it was unfairly described by the distinguished British architecture critic , J M Richards , as ' a sadly insensitive group of buildings in Hollywood-Oriental style . ' Today the complex has weathered well and takes an unobtrusive place in dense tropical foliage against the headland . Perhaps in response to Richards ' abuse , the Taj management has now built , next door and sharing facilities , a Taj Village in a strictly Goan style of low-level cottages surrounded by coconut palms . Thirdly , and thanks to the Indian government 's hosting of the Commonwealth conference in 1983 , there is also The Hermitage , an estate of self-contained luxury villas up on the hill , very much intended for the FT reader who wants to escape the crowd and can afford to . You need to book in advance for Lady Thatcher 's bedroom . By Indian standards , the Fort Aguada complex is expensive . But it works , and it may be worth it . After acclimatising in Goa , the first-time India-hand will be ready to venture out into the real world . The best course is to take one of the regular and long-established itineraries on offer . These are : the Delhi/Agra/Jaipur triangle ; the Rajasthan palaces ; the north ( Nepal , etc , and , these days , Ladakh ) ; the Hindu south . The choice will be influenced by season as well as by local political factors . For example , Kashmir is a no-go area at present ; similarly , there are problems with some of the Himalayan venues , and a specialist travel agent will have to advise . The climate is an obvious decider : you wo n't want to go to Goa , even , between May and September , while the north is less attractive after , say , October . None of these things is rigid : the monsoon does not arrive on the dot . One good possibility , to mention just one example , would be to venture out from Goa on the sort of south Indian tour which is available from various companies . ( Private travel is probably best attempted by second-timers or the young ) . The frequent starting point is Madras , on the east coast , which leads inevitably to the major temples at Madurai ( where there is a newly-converted and delightful Raj-style Taj Group hotel on a hill outside that seething Hindu town ) . You then set out over the mountains of pepper and coffee and tea plantations , via the lakeside game reserve of Periyar ( where you might see elephant ) , to finish up , weary and triumphant after a bone-shattering drive from coast to coast , at Cochin . Thereafter it is either back to Goa or Bombay , or down to Sri Lanka for a few days , where the tourist industry has been hard-hit by troubles in the north-east . First-timers need to remember : that Hindu culture is complex and bewildering ( the current exhibition at the British Museum is a helpful introduction ) ; that distances are very large and the roads bad . You must be prepared to travel for many hours between one experience and the next ; that the price of abdominal health is eternal vigilance - and no ice - plus a bit of luck ; that you must apply for your visa in plenty of time ; that you should take malaria pills and have a tetanus jab ; that the Indian hotel and tourist industry ( on these main routes ) is highly experienced and that its standards have improved greatly in recent years ; that , love it or hate it , India - as they always and truthfully say - is unforgettable . J M Richards wrote one of the best books on Goa . Although dating from 1982 , it has been reprinted in India ( Vikar Publishing House ) and can be tracked down with profit . J D F Jones travelled for a part of his recent trip with Bales Tours ( tel : 0306-885991 ) , one of a number of UK travel companies that specialises in the sub-continent . Fort Aguada Beach Resort , London tel : 071-828-5909 , or through any agency of the Taj Hotels group . Typical low-season rates from now until June 12 would be Dollars 70 plus 35 per cent tax per day for a double room ; Dollars 60 per day plus 35 per cent in the Taj Holiday Village ; and Dollars 170 per day plus 35 per cent in an Aguada Hermitage villa .