In the interests of safety an ordinary motorway contra-flow requires about 10,000 road cones . In view of the number of roads currently under repair this means there are probably more than 3m cones in use in Britain alone . 'By the year 2000 , ' the Highways Agency forecasts , '37 per cent of Britain's motorway network could be operating above its design capacity . ' In other words , over a third of its main roads will be either blocked with cars or coned off for repair . We are moving into the era of King Cone . In the Gloucestershire hamlet of Broughton Poggs this news is cause for optimism . Broughton Poggs is the home of Peter Cook Safety Products , the world 's leading producer of cones - every week they make 25,000 of them . David Morgan , the company 's managing director and inventor of the plastic cone even collects them . He has 570 in his garage . Morgan produced the first PVC cone in 1967 while he was working at ICI and experimenting with liquid polythene . 'It was my job to make products using a rotating moulding machine . I tried designing hollow toys - one was an elephant but when I pulled it out of the mould the trunk kept breaking off . I drove over a wooden police cone going to work one day and realised it was the perfect shape for my machine . ' In 1973 he was invited to set up a cone manufacturing plant for British Telecom and he has been making and collecting them ever since . Morgan was runner-up in a recent British television vote for the most boring man in Britain ( the winner collected brown paper bags ) . But how could anyone want to surround himself with objects that symbolise danger and frustra-tion ? 'For me road cones hold an extraordinary fascination , and I can spot a different design at 100 yards , ' he says . ' I search for different styles everywhere I travel , and then barter for new discoveries with swaps in my boot . ' The prizes in his collection include a five-sided cone he picked up in Manchester , a Malaysian version he found on a beach in the Scilly Isles , and one from his own company which floated ashore while he was on holiday in Corsica . ' I took it through the red channel at Heathrow customs but the man said : 'We have n't got a category for that . OK , carry on . '' The adaptability of these coloured plastic sentries is immense . They turn up guarding wet paint or washed floors in public buildings , on football training grounds or at cycling proficiency test centres , as accessories in student bedsits , and as chewable toys for young pit bull terriers . Morgan spotted one suspended over a naked bulb outside a brothel in Amsterdam . And he recently received a video from a zoo-keeper of a polar bear playing with one - swimming with it and storing his food in it . 'Watch News at Ten every day and there 'll always be one of mine somewhere , ' he says . They possess great authority . Motorists manoeuvre obediently around them even when they have strayed from their original position . The key is to keep them upright - a horizontal cone is usually ignored - and for this reason a legion of workers pour 20 tons of sand a day into the black-plastic base . Morgan has done well from the cones . He runs a highly successful 24-hour manufacturing business with a Pounds 9m turnover . Britain , with the best road safety record in the world , has persuaded other countries to invest in cones and 20 per cent of their sales are overseas , mostly to mainland Europe . But Morgan sells cones to police forces and traffic authorities as far away as Saudi Arabia and China , as well as large and engineering companies across the UK . 'We get orders from all over the world , ' says Morgan . 'One of ours was pulled out of the sea by a man in Fiji and he requested 5,000 . ' Morgan 's company makes everything from the diminutive 13-inch traffic cone to the giant Highwayman . Personalised wedding cones decorated with lace and frills are available to order and Morgan sells about 50 special black funeral cones a week . He has even diversified into road signs , barrier systems , flashing lamps and paint for marking out white and yellow lines . But the production of around 1.5m cones a year is still the chief pre-occupation of the 65 staff at the Broughton Poggs plant . In Britain , the 365-page Traffic Sign Regulation and General Directions booklet gives precise dimensions and colours of cones , and the layout needed for certain types of traffic control . Cones are forever getting stolen , mangled or discoloured , so there is always fresh demand . Is Morgan proud of his job ? 'Well it 's not something I admit to socially , but it 's quite satisfying knowing my product sees people through road works safely . ' What if there is a decline in road building ? 'That 's fine - old worn out roads are better for us . But if and when work starts on extending the M25 to 14 lanes , we 're going to have a big party . '