Armed with a personal computer and a modem , the world of on-line information is just a telephone line and a mouse click away . Once on the 'information superhighway ' the possibilities are almost limitless . From weather forecasts to astro physics , there are few subjects not covered on the internet or in what has become known as 'cyberspace ' . The internet itself is an informal system linking more than 7,500 individual computer networks and more than 2m computers in academic institutions , companies and other organisations . It is used mostly for electronic mail ( e-mail ) and information exchange by an estimated 25m to 30m people - a figure rising by between 5 and 10 per cent a month . But the internet is not the only source of on-line information . There are thousands of bulletin board systems ( BBS ) mostly run by computer enthusiasts , and a wide range of commercial on-line information services . So how does the novice begin to explore this world ? The traditional route has been the local BBS - an electronic notice board on which messages can be left . Most BBS 's also enable users to send ( upload ) or receive ( download ) software and other data . A BBS is run by 'sysops ' ( systems operators ) , who are usually computer enthusiasts to help 'newbies ' - newcomers to the world of PC communications . BBS telephone access numbers - the numbers used by communications software to connect a home PC modem to the BBS modem - are often listed in computer magazines . Most on-line systems , although not CompuServe , expect your communications software to be set to the following parameters : eight bits , no parity , one stop ( or 8 , N,1 ) and support a number of different 'protocols ' or modem communications languages , for downloading computer files . Among the most common protocols are Xmodem , Zmodem , Ymodem and Kermit . Usually there is no charge - other than ordinary telephone charges - for logging on to an amateur BBS . There are , however , also a growing number of commercial BBS , most of which advertise in magazines , which charge for downloading programs ( and sometimes pornographic pictures ) , or can only be reached via premium-priced telephone numbers . Although it is reasonably easy to set up communications software and a modem to dial into a BBS , many new users may find it easier to start with one of the commercial information services such as CompuServe Information Service ( CIS ) or Delphi , or a commercial conferencing system such as the Computer Information eXchange ( CIX ) . Although most of these services started in the US they are now available via a local call in the UK . Their big advantage over the neighbourhood BBS is that they have helpful telephone 'hotlines ' ready to talk new users through their first tentative steps along the information superhighway . These services generally charge a join-up fee and then a flat monthly membership fee of between Pounds 6 and Pounds 10 . However , in an effort to sign up new customers , they often waive the sign-up fee and offer potential users free trials . To sign up with CompuServe call 0800-289378 or log on to 0171-490 8881 by modem with the parameters set to 7,1 , E ; for CIX call 0181-390 8446 or log on to 0181-390 1255 with the parameters set to 8 , N,1 ; for Delphi call 0171-757 7080 . New customers usually receive membership kits which , in addition to a local access telephone number and a password - needed to log on to their master computer - usually include a manual and , in the case of CompuServe , a dedicated software package called Cim ( CompuServe Information Manager ) , which is available in DOS , Windows and Macintosh versions . Although initial charges are low , it is easy to build up a sizeable bill quite quickly . Commercial on-line services generally charge a flat monthly fee , and an additional fee for information outside their basic services , plus , in the UK at least , the PC user will have to pay telephone call charges . To reduce costs , most commercial on-line services give customers local numbers which can be used to access their services . There are also special software packages called off-line readers , or OLRs , that enable you to prepare before the communications software connects to the service and the meter starts ticking . Using an OLR such as NavCis for CompuServe or Ameol and WigWam for CIX , a one-hour session can be reduced to a few minutes on-line . Commercial on-line services also provide one of the simplest methods of connecting to , and sampling the internet . For example CIX , CompuServe and Delphi allow their subscribers to send and receive e-mail to and from other internet addresses . They also provide access to Usenet newsgroups - there are around 10,000 Usenet 'discussion groups ' on the internet . And CIX and Delphi provide access to a special IP ( Internet Protocol ) prompt . This means users can search for files on remote computers and upload or download files from other computers connected to the internet using file transfer protocol ( ftp ) via the on-line service . At present however , the commercial on-line services in Britain stop short of providing 'full ' internet access . In particular they do not provide access to one of the most exciting areas of the internet - the World-Wide Web . Since its creation in 1992 the World-Wide Web has become the fastest-growing internet service , with more than 3,000 Web sites and tens of thousands of documents published by academic institutions , companies and governments . But to access the Web , the fledgling cybernaut needs a direct internet connection - available from a specialised telecommunications company , called an internet service provider . Direct internet access also involves running a communications program called a TCP/IP stack ( the internet 's networking protocol ) and setting up for full direct access to the Internet can be tricky . Fortunately , however , internet service providers have begun to provide software - or make it available for downloading . For many new users this may be a key factor in choosing a service provider . Part 3 on January 7 : choosing an internet service supplier and internet software