The Indian government has launched a tourism promotion programme to increase the number of foreign visitors from 1.76m to 5m over three years . A calmer political climate and further opening up of the economy have led to an increase in tourist arrivals , to 1.76m from 1.5m the previous year . Foreign exchange earnings from tourism increased by 14 per cent to Dollars 1.47bn for 1993-94 , according to figures published by the Ministry of Tourism and Civil Aviation . Mr Ghulam Nabi Azad , tourism minister , said Bombay airport , the country's prime entry point , alone handled 164,000 domestic and international flights , an increase of more than 150 per cent in a decade . Liberalisation of domestic routes last year helped ease both congestion and non-availability of seats on flights within the country . Tourism is India 's third-largest foreign exchange earner , and has more of a range of destinations to offer than most countries in the world . But the country accounts for 0.2 per cent of international tourism , largely because of inadequate infrastructure . Officials in the Tourism Ministry say a big constraint is a lack of middle-level hotels . 'The choice we offer the foreign tourist is limited , ' said a senior official . The foreign tourist must choose between expensive five-star comfort or small hotels that cater to backpackers and lack the most basic of amenities . 'Our plan is to offer something to the tourist between the very wealthy ones and the business travellers , and those who have very little money to spend . ' Foreign hotel chains are enthusiastic about the more relaxed investment rules after liberalisation ( the hotel industry has always been dominated by private companies ) , and are flocking to India with joint ventures . The government estimates that foreign investment is worth at least Dollars 250m ( Pounds 168m ) in the hotel industry . The Australian Southern Pacific hotels plans to start a series of three-star travel lodges in main cities . The Oberoi group is linking with Accor of France to start a network of motels across the country . Kamats , a chain of south Indian restaurants , is linking with the Japanese Dai Ici and Pearl Hotels , to offer budget accommodation at Buddhist pilgrimage destinations . The Indian Taj Group , which operates some of India 's finest hotels , plans a 350-room hotel in Bombay to supplement its famous Taj Mahal , and a series of Club Med resorts in association with the French company . And a group of non-resident Indians has got together with the Irish company , Deltic Management , to build a Rs8.7bn ( Pounds 186m ) 600-room floating luxury hotel in Bombay .