The leader pages of US newspapers have been filled with columns in recent weeks criticising the Clinton administration for appeasing North Korea and urging it to take tougher measures to force Pyongyang to comply with the nuclear non-proliferation treaty . 'If that 's what these pundits want , they should sit on their pencils and lead the charge across the ( Korean ) DMZ , ' said one irritated US State Department official . The worry among US diplomats is that tough actions , ranging from economic sanctions to pre-emptive military strikes against North Korea 's nuclear facilities , could precipitate one of the most destructive wars since 1945 . It is the main reason why the US has been patiently pursuing negotiations with North Korea to persuade it to accept full international inspections of its nuclear sites . The dilemma is what happens if those negotiations fail . Will the US risk a conflict on the Korean peninsula or instead decide to live with a possibly nuclear North Korea as it has done with other suspected nuclear powers such as Pakistan ? There is some optimism that decision will never have to be made . North Korea has been discussing details of the resumption of regular inspections of seven nuclear sites meeting with the International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) for the past two weeks in Vienna . The Vienna talks followed an announcement by the US on January 5 that North Korea had agreed in principle to allow the inspections , which have been suspended for almost a year . The pace of negotiations has been slower than expected , although the US State Department expressed confidence last week that there is 'no reason to believe that there 's been any erosion in the North Korean commitments ' to resume inspections . But US intelligence agencies recently estimated that there is a 'better than even chance ' that North Korea has already constructed one or two crude nuclear devices using plutonium extracted in 1989 from a small 5-megawatt nuclear reactor at the Yongbyon nuclear centre . The fear is that North Korea 's acquisition of nuclear weapons could provoke a nuclear arms race in north-east Asia by forcing Japan and South Korea to follow suit . Pyongyang might also emerge as a supplier of nuclear technology to other anti-western nations , such as Iran . But disagreements exist among policymakers in Washington and Seoul about whether the North 's suspected nuclear weapons programme is real or a bluff and why it is blocking inspections . The US State Department , for example , disputed the intelligence assessment of the North 's nuclear capability . Some US officials privately complain the Defence Department and Central Intelligence Agency have exaggerated the North Korean threat as part of an effort to curtail cuts in their budgets . 'It 's how the game is played in Washington , ' said one official . There are contrasting explanations for North Korea 's behaviour . The most obvious is that the North wants to prevent the IAEA from discovering its nuclear weapons programme because it is intent on possessing nuclear weapons . The alternative view is that the North is using the nuclear inspection issue as a bargaining chip to win diplomatic recognition and economic aid from the US and bolster its crumbling economy . A possible contributory factor is that the US angered the North when it resumed the annual Team Spirit military exercises in South Korea last year . The North agreed to start accepting IAEA inspections in 1992 in return for the suspension of that year 's Team Spirit exercises . Pyongyang apparently saw Team Spirit 's resumption in 1993 as the US breaking its word and it responded by discontinuing the IAEA inspections . An interim settlement could include the US suspending Team Spirit this year if the North permits inspections and agrees to negotiate with South Korea on mutual nuclear inspections as promised in their 1991 non-nuclear pact . This would lay the foundation for a comprehensive agreement in which the US could offer diplomatic recognition and economic support in return for North Korea accepting complete inspections by the IAEA and South Korea . But the negotiations to reach a package deal could be a long and tortuous process . The Clinton administration is being criticised for possibly giving North Korea breathing space to finish its nuclear weapons programme as it engages in protracted talks . Negotiations , however , still appear to be the best option in solving the dispute . A pre-emptive attack on the North 's nuclear facilities would almost certainly cause the North to attack the South . UN economic sanctions , if they are not vetoed by China , might also provoke an attack . North Korea would have to draw on its fuel and food reserves for the military to survive sanctions , which would severely weakened its defence . Pyongyang may then see little alternative but to go on the offensive . It is one reason why Japan and South Korea are cautious about proceeding with sanctions . The options appear tough for a US administration that wants to avoid a war on the Korean peninsula . There is little question that tens and possibly hundreds of thousands would be killed in a conflict that would mainly take place in the heavily-populated environs around Seoul , the world 's fifth largest city , which lies just 35 miles from the DMZ . The Clinton administration has made the North Korean nuclear inspection a test case for stopping nuclear proliferation , but the question remains at what cost . US General Omar Bradley said of the last Korean conflict of 1950-53 that it was 'the wrong war , at the wrong place , at the wrong time , and with the wrong enemy ' . The US will have to determine whether that judgment still holds true .