A new international agreement , guaranteeing equitable access to plant genetic resources should be signed within a few months . This follows the conclusion last Friday of the second session of the Intergovernmental Committee of the Convention on Biological Diversity in Nairobi , Kenya , where delegates agreed that there should be no intellectual property rights governing the use of the 500,000 crop samples held in the gene banks of 11 international agricultural research centres . The committee gave 'strong support for finalising the agreement between the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation and the international research centres as soon as possible ' . It will put the various collections under centralised intergovernmental control under the management of the FAO 's Commission on Plant Genetic Resources . The agreement means that the collections will not be the centres ' assets but will be globally-owned resources and the centres will manage them as trustees not owners , according to Dr Geoff Hawtin , director of the International Plant Genetic Resources Institute . The centres will be charged with the responsibility of ensuring continued availability of materials under free access . There will also be no intellectual property rights ( patents or plant breeder 's rights ) on those materials in the collections , which mainly come from developing countries , and this condition will be passed on to recipients of the samples . The institute has the lead role in dealing with plant genetic resources among the 17 centres funded by the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research , an informal group of donors . Each centre , however , is an independent legal entity governed by a board of trustees . Every year , more than 120,000 germplasm accessions from the collections and 500,000 samples of improved materials are distributed by the centres , mainly to developing countries . The agreement has already been accepted by the FAO 's governing council , the commission and the individual centres . The opening of the Nairobi meeting was overshadowed by accusations by some non-governmental organisations that the World Bank was attempting to seize control of the consultative group 's activities regarding plant genetic resources and to delay signing of any agreements until 1996 . These fears were rejected by Mr Ismail Serageldin , chairman of the consultative group and a vice president of the World Bank , as based on 'fanciful guesswork not backed up by facts ' . However , Mr Henk Hobbelink , director of Genetic Resources Action International ( Grain ) says that in a letter sent before the meeting he told one of the non-governmental organisations that it would be 'foolhardy to lock into agreements ' before then . In a statement issued to the meeting , Dr Serageldin said : 'The CGIAR is committed to carrying out the responsibilities of trusteeship ( over the genetic resources in its gene banks ) in concert with FAO and its Commission on Plant Genetic Resources , and with the contracting parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity ' . Mr Hawtin welcomes the 'clear message from Nairobi that says sign ' . The consultative group would like to sign the agreement but since it is not a legal body it can only do so if each centre delegates its signature to the group chairman . This is what is likely to happen , believes Mr Hawtin ; but he sees possible delays if some centre boards still have to meet to give approval . ' I 'd rather see a quick signature than delays , ' he says , as would the non-governmental organisations , which welcome the Nairobi meeting 's call for an agreement as soon as possible . They see it as an important step in ensuring equitable access to the world 's genetic resources .