No intelligent consumer would buy a car without first taking it for a test-drive . So what about computer products ? Car buyers go to a showroom when they want to try a new model , but buyers of computer systems can now evaluate hardware or software without ever leaving their desks . Digital Equipment Corporation , the US computer maker , is allowing users of the Internet , the self-regulating global computer network , to test the company 's Alpha computers by using their own software programs on its hardware . Without having to go near the machines , users , via the Internet , can tap into one of four Alpha computers located in the US . By activating a standard Internet file transfer protocol , they can then transfer their software to a DEC machine and effectively use the hardware from any range . So far , more than 7,500 users internationally have logged-on to try out DEC machines and test its product claims of speed and efficiency . James Bishop , faculty fellow in the department of physics at the University of Notre Dame , Indiana , says that when hardware had to be shipped to customers for testing , time was wasted . The scheme also reduces DEC 's marketing costs . 'We only have to manage a handful of machines connected to the Internet , rather than running many systems in the marketplace , or loaning out a large inventory , ' says Russ Jones , DEC 's marketing manager . Some users log on to the Alpha system in order to test their own programs . Software developers , for example , use DEC machinery to evaluate new codes before attempting to market them , while software users use Alpha equipment to check for bugs in their own systems . 'We have been encountering problems in running certain software on our systems , ' says Ignacio Lizardo , an engineer at United Technologies Corporation 's chemical systems division in San Jose , California . 'By transferring our program codes to the DEC systems we can determine if it is a problem with our system or see if we need to make hardware upgrades . ' DEC believes the Internet allows for more rigorous testing of its products . 'The fact that it is in the public domain on the Internet allows people to satisfy themselves that it is a robust system when they combine the hardware with their own software , ' says Olivier DeWandre , programme manager for education and research at DEC Europe . Software buyers can also test packages before they hand over their cash . Unipalm , the UK 's largest provider of Internet connections , allows network users to run several programs via the Internet before deciding to purchase . Users who want an evaluation copy of a software program are given a 'key ' - not unlike an ATM pin number - that allows them to download programs on to their systems . The programs are 'time-bombed ' so that they work only for a limited period . 'If you like the program you get in touch with us and we will sell you a permanent key , ' says a Unipalm spokesman .