The pharmaceutical industry is devoting huge resources to cancer research and development , in relation to sales of existing drugs . Although reliable figures are not available , industry sources estimate that companies worldwide spend Dollars 3bn ( Pounds 2bn ) a year on cancer R & D . US companies are responsible for about half the total . The cancer therapeutics market is worth about Dollars 6.5bn this year , according to Frost & Sullivan , the international market research company : 38 per cent in the US , 26 per cent in Europe and 36 per cent in the rest of the world . The leading suppliers are Zeneca of the UK ( whose tamoxifen was the best selling-cancer drug with Dollars 550m sales in 1993 ) and Bristol-Myers Squibb of the US . 'Devoting almost 50 per cent of sales revenues to R & D is a very high figure indeed , ' says David Barrett , Bristol-Myers Squibb 's strategic projects director . The industry 's overall R & D expenditure is 15 per cent of drug sales . The main reason why cancer spending is so high is that the disease is top of the industry 's priority list of 'unmet needs ' . Although deaths from heart disease are twice those from cancer , they are falling - and cardiologists already have a much wider range of effective treatments than oncologists . At the same time , scientific advances are giving many new leads both to traditional drug companies and to the emerging biotechnology sector . The world now has more than 1,000 experimental cancer drugs in the R & D pipeline . Analysts such as Decision Resources and Frost & Sullivan predict continued growth of more than 10 per cent a year in the cancer market into the next century . It is expected to exceed Dollars 10bn by 1998 . The industry 's cancer R & D spending is matched by a further Dollars 3bn a year from the world 's governments and charities . By far the largest contributor is the US National Cancer Institute , which receives Dollars 2bn a year in federal funding . The charitable sector is particularly important in the UK , where the Imperial Cancer Research Fund and Cancer Research Campaign spend Pounds 100m a year between them - 10 times as much as the state-funded Medical Research Council .