PHILADELPHIA ( 12 ) Jonathan Demme KAFKA ( 15 ) Steven Soderbergh COOL RUNNINGS ( PG ) John Turteltaub THE PELICAN BRIEF ( 12 ) Alan J. Pakula Is it good to be gay ? For Britain , the sight of Hollywood and the House of Commons jumping on the same bandwagon in the same week must be the most startling - and/or stirring - of modern times . Westminster gives us a new age of consent . Tinseltown with Philadelphia gives us a new age of moviegoing awareness . And even Uncle Oscar has clambered on the zeitgeist , with a best actor nomination for the film 's star Tom Hanks . Hanks has this writer 's vote . His believability as an Aids-ravaged , job-dismissed lawyer gives shape and measure to the film 's at times flood-level sentimentalism . The first mainstream US movie ever to tackle Aids , Philadelphia is directed by Jonathan Demme as if he had been abducted by Gay Lib and forced to make amends for his Silence Of The Lambs . You recall that brouhaha : film pilloried by agit-gays right up to Oscar time for its picture of a ( seemingly ) homosexual serial killer . Philadelphia takes a lawyer and crosses out 'seemingly . ' Hanks 's face already shows the tell-tale blots of Kaposi 's Sarcoma when a job superior asks 'What 's that on your forehead , pal ? ' Hanks mutters something about squash balls , but we know better . He is losing weight ; his gay friends are offering make-up tips ( 'Tahitian bronze ' to hide the lesions ) ; and the film is offering captions like 'Nine days later ' to stress that this is ticking time-bomb territory , where love and illness meet in a countdown to apocalypse . While half our brain hardens itself to the threat of hyperbole , the other half senses something wonderful here . Ron Nyswaner 's script plots the film as a legal suspense story , using courtroom scenes to resolve Hanks's unfair-dismissal suit against the firm that has soon pushed him off the payroll and torn up partnership promises . This is just the populist approach -what filmgoer resists a trial ? - to capture all those gay-rights-resistant audiences in America 's Bible belts or Britain 's own bigotry zones . Hanks 's co-star Denzel Washington adds another twist to the plot . He is the radical black lawyer who agrees to be Hanks 's legal Galahad , even though the one flaw in Mr W 's liberalism is a tendency to homophobia . While we are turning to mush during Hanks 's big self-revelation scene - a surreally-lit fantasia in which our tearful hero expounds the Maria Callas aria keening from his CD-player while he 'dances ' with his dripfeed stand - DW looks on with a blend of cautious scepticism and heterosexual high anxiety . ( By the film 's final fade , of course , he has resolved his problems and become as mushy as the rest of us ) . To have made this character a black was a touch of genius . It means that Mr and Mrs Intolerant Filmgoer , if they want to make an anti-gay alliance with one of the film 's characters , must do so with a member of another 'minority' they might not be on kissing terms with . Only alternative : to side with the bigwig bigots ( Jason Robards and Co ) who spend the movie 's second half pinned to their attorney 's table while the camera frisks them for guilty reaction shots . Philadelphia knows every trick and plays it . But it will still send all but the stoniest cineastes sniffling from the theatre . Its heart is in the right place and whatever else may be sorcery or special pleading , Hanks is the real thing : no sentimental martyr but a messy , plausible collage of rage , bewilderment , self-pity , resignation and gallows humour . That puckered baby face , that elastic voice with the built-in shrugs , preside over a convincingly wasted body : one from which Hanks shed 30 pounds for filming , in acting 's most heroic dietary crash-course since De Niro went the other way in Raging Bull . Philadelphia comes with a big , bold , bells-and-whistles subject . 'Ah , an Aids movie ] ' - everyone can say it . But what is Kafka , the second film from director Steven ( sex , lies and videotape ) Soderbergh , about ? Limping into London two years after it was made , this Prague-filmed fantasy about Franz K ( Jeremy Irons ) and the Gothic adventures he might have had if he had been a fictional character , chasing murderers , mutants and mad doctors , is like two hours on a free-association couch in the ' K ' section of the Great Literature library . Screenwriter Lem Dobbs must have said 'Kafka ' to himself and then gone berserk at his mental word-processor . He gives us vast clickety-click offices ; a pair of sinister twins ; Theresa Russell as one of FK's standard-issue teasing heroines ; Alec Guinness and Ian Holm as assorted authority figures ; and a riot of cobbled streets , graveyards and beetling castles . What we do not have is a plot , unless you count the jumble of conspiracy shenanigans that climax somehow in a castle laboratory . Soderbergh and Dobbs may feel they must pay their dues to German Expressionism , but why should we pay to watch ? We tire quickly - and a perplexed-looking Irons looks as if he tired even more quickly - of the in-joky names ( Murnau , Orlok ) and invocations of art gone-by . Other choices this week are the non-pretentious Cool Runnings and the somnolently zigzagging The Pelican Brief . The first is all about the Jamaican bobsled team that made history when they competed at the 1988 Calgary winter Olympics . Four sun-black West Indians , played by actors whose names seem to have fallen off a Scrabble board , parlay their home-town sprinting and go-kart skills into the art of hurtling down snow chutes . A film that might have been 'inspirational ' proves 'inspired ' . Debut director John Turteltaub has a comic timing that Hollywood veterans might envy , and the script rattles around like a crowded bobsled risking sharp corners . Boldest touch of all was to cast fat and funny John Candy as the team 's trainer , an ex-Gold Medal winner , and then to fill him with a sour , abrasive , worldweary wit worthy of Walter Matthau . A surprise ; a delight . Neither of those words suggests itself for The Pelican Brief . You remember the twists and thrills in the John Grisham-based The Firm ? Repeat here , with diminished returns . Julia Roberts is the fledgeling lawyer who flies straight into a Giant Conspiracy , beginning with the murder of two Supreme Court justices . And the supporting characters are famous Hollywood names pushed unceremoniously into the victim or villain lobby - Sam Shepard , John Heard , Robert Culp - while the plot dashes through every picturesque power-corridor it can find , ending up at the White House . The only character you believe in is Denzel Washington as Miss JR 's newsman friend , flying out from Philadelphia to sketch in another sharp-nosed knight errant . As for Roberts herself , I never felt I was watching a frightened truth-seeker , more an actress drowning in too much plot . Alan J. Pakula , who could direct films like this in his sleep ( All The President 's Men , The Parallax View ) , seems to have done so here . Finally , a brief hat-doffing to the success of these islands at the recent Berlin Film Festival . The Golden Bear for best film placed its paw on In The Name Of The Father . The Golden Bear for best actress hugged Crissy Rock in Ken Loach 's new Ladybird , Ladybird . ( Mr Hanks got best actor for Philadelphia ) . And Loach himself won the International Critics Prize for his truth-based drama that for all its bureaucracy-walloping OTT tendencies - multiple mother ( Miss Rock ) keeps losing babies to overzealous social workers - had more energy than all the other films in Berlin put together .