A week ago , Number 47 Winchester Avenue was a comfortable family house in one of Sydney 's affluent North Shore suburbs . Today it is a charred wreck , razed to its foundations . The owners have fled , and only the ornamental plant-holders - which , bizarrely , survived the weekend 's bush-fires undamaged - hint at the home that once was . A few yards down the road , Number 53 has been luckier . The low-slung residence is still intact , although the weekend blaze licked at its doors . However , while the building was once perched on a leafy hillside , its outlook now comprises burnt undergrowth and blackened trees . A smell of charcoal hangs in the air , and carpet-cleaning vans line the street . 'At least , we 're still standing , ' remarks one resident stoically , as she scrubs at matting in the 30-degree heat . These inhabitants of West Lindfield are only a small portion of the New South Wales residents totting up damage from the past week 's bush-fires . The infernos - the worst to hit the state in more than a century - have left four people dead , several hundred injured , and almost 200 buildings destroyed . Viewed from the air , the Royal National Park , a 15,000-hectare expanse just to the south of Sydney , resembles a huge , black smudge . Across the state , more than 600,000 hectares are reckoned to have burnt . Even now it is hard to say with any certainty that the worst is over . All week the authorities have urged against complacency , and yesterday the NSW Bush Fire Services warned that the situation 'remains fairly volatile ' . More than 100 fires are still burning , although half are not viewed as dangerous , and the main focus has shifted away from Sydney to the Gosper Mountain/Wollemi National Park area to the north of the city . Weather forecasts offer only moderate encouragement . While storms are predicted , they are not expected to have a significant dousing effect - and lightning strikes could yet hamper the fire-fighters ' task . A smoke-related haze hangs across Sydney , pushing pollution indices to about 10 times their normal level . Meanwhile , questions about New South Wales ' handling of the disaster are already being asked . No one queries the dedication and skill with which fire-fighters tackled the blazes , but there are suggestions that inadequate forward preparation allowed the disaster to get out of hand . The problem is that NSW rarely suffers from long , dry spells , and the 10-day stretch which led up to this week 's fires was highly unusual . Nevertheless , in a 1992-93 report , the state 's department of bush fire services warned that other government agencies should review their fire prevention and public education strategies . Mr Phil Koperberg , commissioner of the NSW Bush Fire Services , added that he was 'duty bound to express concern ' about the lack of action being taken to reduce hazards . He pointed out that much of the eastern part of the state was heavily forested and produced 'high levels of combustible material ' . 'There continues to be an alarming downturn in both the quantity and quality of those elements of fire management practices designed to reduce the amount of such fuels , ' he suggested . This week both Mr Koperberg and Mr Terry Griffiths , the NSW police minister , played down this prophetic caution - saying that no one had urged an urgent response , and that immediate action would have been impossible , given the approaching summer season , anyway . But this rejoinder has not deterred calls for a reassessment of NSW 's fire-management practices . On Wednesday Mr Griffiths conceded that a review will almost certainly take place . But , as the damage assessment is made , a few brighter spots are emerging . Estimates of the cost to the insurance industry are being scaled back , for example . The Insurance Council of Australia , the main industry group , said yesterday it now expected insured claims to total between ADollars 50m ( Pounds 24m ) and ADollars 100m , with most of this stemming from residential , rather than commercial , policies . To date , ICA members report about 877 claims , for an expected payout of ADollars 40m . This compares with estimates earlier in the week of ADollars 150m , and contrasts favourably with other recent catastrophes . The 1983 'Ash Wednesday ' fires in Victoria and South Australia , for example , cost insurers about ADollars 400m . In the US , Hurricane Andrew - which ripped through Florida and Louisiana in August 1992 and was the nation 's costliest disaster -brought a insurance bill of USDollars 15bn ( Pounds 10bn ) . That said , insurers admit that it is still hard to assess the degree to which affected homeowners may have been either under-insured or without insurance altogether . The ICA reckons that about 10 per cent of Australians lack property insurance , but acknowledges that the figure can vary enormously between areas . 'It 's too early to make an assessment , ' commented one official . He added that member companies had received 'hundreds of phone-calls ' from residents in both Sydney and Melbourne , checking up on coverage levels for the future .