World leaders praised Richard Nixon at the weekend for his bold foreign policy moves , with some of America 's Cold War enemies most warm in their praise , AP and Reuters report . China 's Communist leaders hailed Nixon as a man of 'strategic foresight and political courage ' in messages of condolences . Chinese President Jiang Zemin and Premier Li Peng praised Mr Nixon for his 1972 breakthrough visit to Beijing that began rapprochement between China and the US and for his efforts to improve relations even after he resigned . His last visit was in April 1993 . Mr Nixon also was warmly remembered in Russia . President Boris Yeltsin said he was 'one of the first major world politicians who have understood Russia and understood what it was fighting for ' . Mr Yeltsin had refused to meet Mr Nixon during his 10-day trip to Russia last month because the former president had met with some of Yeltsin's political opponents . But Mr Nixon is credited with establishing the policy of detente toward the Soviet Union during his presidency and , in recent years , with pushing for US aid for Russia . Even India , whose relations with the US reached an all-time low during Mr Nixon 's administration , commended the former president for taking bold steps in international affairs . 'Although President Nixon 's term was marked by a certain controversy , he was well known in international affairs as having been courageous enough to take bold steps such as normalisation of relations with China and steps towards East-West detente , ' Foreign Ministry spokesman Shiv Shankar Mukherjee said . Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin , who was ambassador to the US during Mr Nixon 's presidency , praised his support of Israel in the 1973 Yom Kippur War 'in the face of the opposition of most of the world ' . ' I am convinced that history will recall the great role he played on the international scene , ' French President Francois Mitterrand said in extending condolences to his family . Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali , secretary-general of the United Nations , extending his condolences , called Mr Nixon 's impact in international affairs 'especially significant . ' Sir Edward Heath , who was Britain 's prime minister in 1970-74 , hailed Mr Nixon 's diplomatic skills . 'He discussed policies with all those likely to be affected and took into account their views . One never felt one had been stamped on or ignored , ' he told BBC radio . But Hanoi - where northern Vietnamese remember Mr Nixon as the man whose bombers pounded them in 1972 during the Vietnam War - officially closed its account with Mr Nixon with a terse five-word statement . 'May he rest in peace , ' a Foreign Ministry spokesman said .