A start-up Swiss company has developed a polymer compound that provides continuously adjusted balancing for the life of a vehicle tyre when applied to its inside wall . Everbalance , led by Swedish entrepreneur Bertil Carnehammar , claims its compound lengthens significantly the life of tyres and provides a more comfortable ride for passengers than tyres balanced with conventional lead weights . So far , testing of the compound has been concentrated on commercial vehicles , but it is now being extended to cars . The development is based on the discovery that vibrations caused by imbalances in the tyre and rim of a vehicle will cause a liquid within the tyre to move away from the source of the vibration . Carnehammar , a former marketing executive with Philips and Rank Xerox , says he and his colleagues learned of this phenomenon by reading patent applications for compounds designed to seal tyre punctures . The origin of their own research was , in fact , a tyre sealant compound that had been developed by a Danish scientist for Volvo in the early 1980s . However , they soon became disenchanted with the notion of sealing and concentrated on balancing . The challenge was to develop a compound that had the properties of a liquid but would also adhere all around the inside wall of the tyre when the vehicle was stationary . It also had to be viscous in all climates , nontoxic , noncorrosive and effective on several types and sizes of tyre . By 1988 , they were sufficiently satisfied to begin road tests with a few US fleet operators . 'The reception was very good , but people did not come back , ' Carnehammar recalls . It seems that customers were nervous about putting a chemical compound in their tyres . Also , tyre manufacturers threatened to invalidate warranties . This forced Everbalance into new research and testing to prove that the compound would have no ill effects on tyres . This has now been completed , and the group , with endorsements from recognised German and US testing organisations , is starting general distribution . The compound , which is made mainly from non-toxic glycol , cellulose fibres and corrosion inhibitors , sells for about Dollars 25 per kilogram , enough for one truck tyre . Carnehammar says the increase in tyre life varies with brands and with vehicle types , but 20 per cent is typical . It will not work on tyres that are more than 500g out of radial balance nor on tyres with a significant lateral imbalance . One of the main distributors is Sumitomo Corporation , the Japanese trading company at the centre of a group that includes tyre-maker Sumitomo Rubber . Carnehammar says that tyre companies , still reeling from the reduction in their sales caused by the universal adoption of long-lasting radial tyres , are unhappy about the introduction of a product that will make their tyres last still longer . But Sumitomo concluded that the compound would be successful and saw it as an opportunity to build market share . Everbalance hopes to introduce a balancing compound for cars next year , but development has proved complicated . Whereas the normal life of a truck tyre is a year or less , car tyres tend to remain in service longer , so the product 's endurance must be ensured . And it must be tested on a much wider range of tyres , some 200 compared with 30 truck tyre types . Also , the existing formula does not perform well at speeds of above 100mph , although that would seem to be a problem only in Germany .