The new film The Nightmare Before Christmas , is a children 's story but you could be forgiven for thinking that it describes the panic-stricken weeks of December in the life of a woman juggling job and family . Work schedules are telescoped by the impending long break , and the pressure of shopping escalates . If you are in charge you must not forget the details crucial to the smooth running of Christmas day . All this means that you find yourself firmly at the bottom of the shopping list . This is a pity , for Christmas dressing deserves a little thought . It is a day of oddly juxtaposed activities where few rules apply . A leisurely , glamorous breakfast may be interrupted by hectic present-opening with the children . A trip to church may be followed by making the gravy . We all imagine that those who live high-profile lives , who appear to have made it in life , have sorted out such dilemmas . To find out , we asked a selection of successful career women and some prominent social high-flyers to give us their guide to Christmas and how to wear ( and bear ) it . BREAKFAST Rosa Monckton plans to spend Christmas morning at her London flat with her husband , journalist Dominic Lawson , and daughter Savannah , two . 'We will have been to midnight Mass but Savannah will be up and excited by 7am so we 'll start then and have a long , leisurely breakfast . Later we may go to my parents for a traditional lunch . ' I do n't want to plan at home because I organise very publicly at work right up until Christmas Eve . I certainly sha n't plan what to wear ; clothes are a low priority . Comfort is essential . I shall assume I have something suitable , like a wonderful velvet dressing gown , in my wardrobe . Though I could easily be wrong ] ' Patricia Hodge , the actress , currently starring in The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie at the Strand Theatre in London , will be working until the end of the Christmas Eve matinee . ' I love 'doing ' Christmas , although the preparation is an enormous headache . I take it in turns with my sister . This is her year luckily - I have only one day off . There 'll be about 20 for lunch and we all help . ' I shopped in the autumn for Christmas clothes that would be flexible for other occasions . This silk chenille sweater and panne velvet skirt have the right mood together but look different when worn with other things . I 'll put a jokey Christmas apron over them for helping in the kitchen . ' Sally Dalzell runs her wardrobe consultancy , Change of A-Dress , with a partner . The Christmas run-up is their busiest time . 'We lived abroad until quite recently so I am happy to have a traditional English Christmas in London . After my three children , aged nine to 12 , come home from boarding school I want to devote myself to them so time for me is bottom of the list . We will also have my two grown-up stepchildren staying . 'On Christmas morning it 's straight into turkey-cooking and present-opening . I like to look smart although not hugely dressy . Relaxation and comfort come above all else ; I get hot cooking . A loose cashmere sweater and leggings would be great . I can add a velvet scarf and a coat for church , swap the leggings for satin pyjama trousers at home . I do n't like Christmassy colours . I would put the outfit together from pieces I already owned . ' Anastasia Alexander , an American , started her Aroma Therapeutics business in Britain two years ago . It is expanding rapidly in the US and Europe . 'This is a very busy time both at work and socially , so I have to pre-plan . In America , Thanksgiving is the family celebration ; Christmas is party time . So for breakfast I would probably still be wearing an evening dress . Here we prefer to be in the country with my three stepchildren , our 14-month-old daughter , Alexia , and our nanny . ' I am very organised with clothes , adding a few pieces each season to update the classics . I like wearably avant-garde designers : Dolce e Gabbana , Romeo Gigli , Dries van Noten . I have already planned my Christmas wardrobe . In the morning I will go riding and then have a leisurely breakfast . I would choose something country-style but festive , like a velvet waistcoat and trousers . ' LUNCH Ewa Lewis , social editor of The Tatler , is Polish by birth . She has a family house party for 14 in Gloucestershire , for which preparations have long been under way and there will be a mix of traditions . 'In Poland , Christmas Eve is the big night so we have a formal dinner with caviar , borscht and lots of fish . Christmas day is relaxed - presents , church , champagne , then turkey for lunch . The staff have a holiday so I give everyone , especially my children , aged 15 and 13 , jobs to do . I co-ordinate it all and cook . ' I do n't pre-plan what to wear at home during Christmas but I am very organised . I shop early in the season from my favourite designers - St Laurent , Tomasz Starzewski , Bruce Oldfield , Laura B - with festivities in mind . Knowing that a country Christmas will include sporty and very dressy occasions , I take down what I need . For any lunch out over the holiday I think a suit in rich velvet is right ; at home I might wear a soft trouser suit . ' Lady Charles Spencer Churchill , aka interior decorator Jane Churchill , will go with her three sons , aged from 23 to 11 , to the family country home - Blenheim . She says : 'Christmas lunch is a fairly informal , family occasion and I think a suit is right . I particularly like Armani 's - they are soft and classic yet smart . Pastels are very becoming and show off jewellery well . I 'm lucky , I do n't have to stuff the turkey so I can relax and enjoy the whole atmosphere . For the evening I would change to something more formal . ' Alessandra Rossi is a Milanesa , married to a London-based Italian investment banker . She loves entertaining . ' I shop in September , with Christmas in mind , at St Laurent and Gucci . I never leave it till the last minute because nothing will be left in my size . I plan what to take but our family lunch is sporty rather than dressy . The men wear a tie , the women something with red in it . I think a printed silk shirt and suede jeans would look relaxed but festive . ' Paola Tholstrup is a mix of Italian , Polish and German but was brought up in Switzerland . Her husband , Mogens , owns London restaurant Daphne 's and they have a 20-month-old daughter . ' I do n't exactly pre-plan my clothes , but I take a selection that I've bought over the years from my favourite shops - Browns , Joseph , Ronit Zilhka , Jil Sander . I am not interested enough to look for a specific Christmas dress . For the Christmas Eve dinner I would take a black cocktail dress ; for lunch something cosy but smart like a knitted dress spruced up with gilt buttons . '