Any Star Wars buffs who ever dreamt of fighting the Rebel Alliance by flying an Imperial starfighter under Darth Vader 's command can now act out their fantasies by buying TIE Fighter , one of the dozens of new computer games on sale this Christmas . TIE Fighter is the latest launch from Lucas Arts , the games subsidiary created in the early 1980s by George Lucas , director of Star Wars , at his state-of-the-art entertainment laboratory at San Rafael , California . Mr Lucas , who dropped out of the Hollywood mainstream over a decade ago to pursue his passion for technology , was a pioneer of the use of movie themes and characters in games . His Star Wars games often feature at the top of the computer games charts and the Hollywood studios are now racing to follow Lucas Arts into the games sphere . Time Warner earlier this year acquired Renegade , a games software house . New Line , the film company owned by Ted Turner , the new-media mogul , recently formed a Dollars 30m ( Pounds 18m ) joint venture with France 's Havas to develop a global games business . Even record companies are muscling into the market . Motown , the music label owned by PolyGram , recently launched a Motown Games subsidiary . The next convert to the games sphere is mooted to be Walt Disney , which is expected this week to announce plans for the formation of a new interactive entertainment division . Disney , like other studios , presently licenses its characters for use in games devised by other companies such as Sega and Nintendo , the Japanese games specialists . The catalyst for Hollywood 's sudden surge of interest in computer games is the emergence of the new generation of disc-based games . The games market has since the early 1980s been dominated by the 16-bit cartridge consoles made by Sega and Nintendo . For the past year or so the market has been moving towards disc-based games played on home computers and multimedia machines that are able to play CD-Roms , or interactive discs . Lucas Arts and other companies have already made the most of the enhanced qualities of disc medium to create more sophisticated games . They will be able to reach new levels of sophistication with the next wave of change - the launch of the 32-bit and 64-bit disc-based games , that are now being introduced in Japan and will come out next year in the US and Europe . These games are much more powerful than the old 16-bit cartridge consoles . They have the capacity to create cinematic sounds and images that are perfect vehicles for the characters and plots of Hollywood movies . 'There 's no doubt that CD-Roms and the new games formats could become a phenomenal growth market , ' says Michael Lynne , president of New Line in New York . 'All the attributes of a motion picture will soon be available on a computer screen , so we can apply our skills to create games and informative 'edutainment ' products . ' New Line , like the other studios , plans to become more aggressive at adapting its movie concepts into games . However , Randy Komisar , president of Lucas Arts , suspects that Hollywood may have underestimated the complexity of the games market . 'There is scope to use the techniques of movie-making in a game - we do it all the time , ' he says . 'But film is a linear medium and a game is a virtual experience . If you take the content of a movie to use in a game , it must be developed so that it is exciting and engaging in an interactive context . '