Taiwan yesterday expressed regret over what it described as the accidental shelling of China after a burst of Taiwanese anti-aircraft rounds landed on the mainland , seriously wounding two people . Beijing reacted angrily , describing the shelling as a vicious attack that 'sabotaged the peaceful atmosphere across the Taiwan Strait ' . China claimed that 12 shells had landed in a suburb of Xiamen which is located on the mainland coast adjacent to Taiwan . It expressed 'grave concern ' and demanded severe punishment for those responsible . Taiwan 's defence ministry said it was investigating the 'unfortunate mistake ' in which anti-aircraft shells used in a training exercise had failed to explode in mid-air but landed instead on the mainland . 'We express deep regret over this mistaken incident which had no hostile intent , ' said a Taiwanese statement . Taiwanese officials have not at this stage explained how the shells came to be fired in the direction of the mainland in the first place . Taiwan has offered to pay compensation to the wounded . The errant shells were fired from anti-artillery batteries on the island of Lesser Quemoy , six kilometres to the east of Xiamen . The island was often at the centre of fierce artillery duels in the 1950s between Taiwan and the mainland . Yesterday 's incident will add to unease across the Taiwan Strait , but seems unlikely to affect a timetable for continuing talks between Taiwanese and mainland officials aimed at improving working relations . The next round of talks is due to be held in the Yangtze River town of Nanjing between November 21-23 . The discussions have been dealing with issues such as illegal immigration , postal and telecommunications links and prisoner exchanges . In Taiwan , Mr William Li , spokesman for the Mainland Affair Council which formulates China policy , said he doubted yesterday 's shelling would have a serious impact on relations . 'This is an isolated incident and it will not affect relations across the straits , ' he said .