Sir , Peter Birch 's suggestion ( Letters , 11 March 1994 ) that rival financial institutions be allowed to distribute literature to building society customers takes the concept of direct mail to new extremes . Such customers might well feel that the fact that they have a mortgage or savings account with a particular society should be regarded as confidential information , and thus unavailable for distribution to any organisation that feels it would like to know their names and addresses for its own commercial advantage . There is , however , a more fundamental point . Mr Birch draws a parallel between public companies and building societies , but ignores a crucial difference . Building society customers have paid nothing for their membership rights . It is not clear , in equity , why those customers that happen to have such rights at a time when a third party makes a bid for a building society should be entitled to a windfall gain . The situation in a public company , owned by individuals or institutions that have put up equity capital and who face the risk of loss as well as the possibility of profit , is quite different . Mr Birch apparently feels that building society boards are not accountable for their actions . In fact , building societies have no monopoly over the mortgage and savings markets , as recent trends in market share show . In today 's climate if they do not offer the right product at the right time to the right customers they rapidly diminish in importance , as customers take their business elsewhere . Uniquely among financial institutions , building societies are required by their legislation to contact their members , and gain their approval , before moving into new business areas outside of their mainstream mortgage and savings activity . Moreover , boards face their electorates at the annual general meeting each year . Over the past few years , members of societies have been elected as directors without the backing of the existing board ( including a member of Abbey National to its board when it was still a building society ) and this year has once again seen a hotly contested election at a large society . Building societies ' corporate governance is based on the principle of 'one person one vote ' ; votes are not for sale in the market place . Most of the shares in our large plc financial institutions are owned by other financial organisations . The question of who is accountable to whom , and how responsibility for that accountability is discharged within a relatively small group of organisations , mostly based in the City of London , is perhaps a more fruitful starting point for any investigation into issues of corporate governance than the building societies . G R Lister , chairman , The Building Societies Association , 3 Savile Row , London W1