Newmont Gold , the biggest US gold producer , yesterday claimed that its patented process for recovering gold from very low grade refractory ( or difficult ) ore by using bacteria was commercially viable . The company has been employing thiobacillus ferro-oxidans , naturally-occuring 'bugs ' , to do in months what would otherwise take millions of years . Gencor of South Africa uses similar bacteria for its gold bio-leaching process , increasingly employed world-wide , but Newmont 's is different in that ore is piled in a huge heap rather than treated by liquid in tanks . Newmont has already stockpiled at its mines on the Carlin Trend in Nevada material that would be waste if bio-leaching did not work . Mr Peter Philip , president , said that it was now likely Newmont would be able to count the gold in the material towards its reserves by the end of the year : 1.1m ounces of it . Costs would depend each specific project but Mr Philip said that they would be roughly Dollars 3.50 a tonne treated . His company was in talks with American Barrick , its neighbour on the Carlin Trend , which has about 20m tonnes of low grade , refractory material containing 1m ounces of gold . If it proves commercially viable to use Newmont 's bio-leaching process on the Barrick material , the partners would share the capital costs and the profits . Mr Philip said Newmont had identified other mines around the world where bio-leaching might be able to turn waste into ore and was looking for more joint ventures similar to the one contemplated with Barrick . He said treatment of the Barrick material could begin on a commercial basis as early as next year . Newmont would not need to treat its own material until 1996 . Mr Philip hoped that before then Newmont 's new process would have been superseded by a second process that could release gold from low-grade , refractory ore that also contains carbon - a material to which gold naturally sticks , so no matter how well the bacteria do their job , the precious metal is still not released . Newmont 's land in Nevada has great deal of this type of material containing an estimated 2.9m ounces of gold .