NKK , Japan 's second largest steelmaker , plans to more than halve its capital investment this year in an effort to cut costs and tide it over the recession . Mitsubishi Motors , the Japanese car company , meanwhile said it was testing Korean-made steel , which is as much as 20 per cent cheaper than Japanese steel , underscoring the growing rift in the traditionally strong business ties Japanese companies have had with each other . If Mitsubishi decided to use Korean steel , it would be the first Japanese car company to do so on any scale in the domestic market . NKK said that as part of its restructuring programme it would reduce capital spending to Y63bn ( Pounds 414.5m ) , or 52 per cent less than the Y130bn spent last year . The company , which expects to make a Y25bn loss in the year to March , is planning to reduce capital spending by March 1997 to one-third of levels seen in the past three years . The move highlights the increasingly difficult trading environment facing Japanese steelmakers , battered by falling demand at home , the strong yen and increasing competition from cheaper , foreign-made steel . The car industry provides as much as 20 per cent of overall steel demand in Japan . Earlier this month , the main steelmakers were forced to agree price cuts demanded by leading carmakers , for the first time in five years . Mitsubishi emphasised that there was no change in its policy of maintaining good relations with Japanese steelmakers . 'The high quality of Japanese cars owes much to the technology development efforts of Japanese steelmakers , ' Mitsubishi said . But Japanese carmakers themselves are under extreme pressure to reduce costs . Even if Mitsubishi in the end decides against using Korean steel , the message will have been delivered - the recession has made vulnerable one link that had seemed inviolable . The US government yesterday upheld a preliminary ruling that Japanese makers of grain-oriented electrical steel have been dumping their products in the US market . If the International Trade Commission decides that the practice is hurting US business , Japanese steelmakers could face anti-dumping tariffs of up to 31.08 per cent .