A maverick drugs industry entrepreneur may be about to prove his detractors wrong with a cancer drug that appears to be as good as existing treatments , but without severe side-effects . The drug will be submitted for regulatory approval in the first quarter of 1995 and could be on sale in Europe by 1996 . Dr David Horrobin 's company , Scotia Pharmaceuticals , yesterday published final-stage clinical trial results on EF13 , a pancreatic cancer drug , which show that the life expectancy of cancer sufferers increased by up to two-thirds compared with patients on chemotherapy . Shares in Scotia Pharmaceuticals rose 21p to 274p after the company presented its results to City analysts . With the price rise , Scotia has become the UK 's second biggest biotechnology company by market capitalisation . Cancer experts gave the results a cautious welcome . Professor Gordon McVie , scientific director at the Cancer Research Campaign , a London-based charity , said the results were encouraging . But he pointed out that the trials , which compared EF13 with historic data on mortality , would have been more convincing if the drug had been compared with a placebo in which neither doctor nor patient knew what was being administered . Scotia said the promising preliminary trial data meant there were ethical problems in knowingly withholding the drug from sufferers . Professor Karol Sikora , cancer consultant at Hammersmith Hospital , London , said the results were 'interesting ' but that 'much more evaluation ' was needed . Cancer of the pancreas is one of the deadliest forms of the disease , with about 60,000 deaths a year in Europe and North America . The historic data suggest that , with the normal treatment regime in the UK , average life expectancy is just over three months . With the intensive chemotherapy sometimes used in the US , the figure is seven months . With high doses of EF13 patients survived for a year on average . As the trial was not placebo-controlled it is possible that patients on EF13 survived longer because they had been selected for being stronger or because doctors gave them extra attention . Success for the drug would vindicate Dr Horrobin 's championing of an obscure corner of chemistry dealing with fatty acids . Normally , drug research is based on protein chemistry . The former professor of medicine at Montreal University began by selling evening primrose oil , a natural source of fatty acids , in health food shops and used the profits to establish research centres and manufacturing plants in Nova Scotia , Canada , and the western isles of Scotland . He developed three drugs for treating skin conditions .