Contempt of court proceedings have been issued against some of Britain's biggest producers of ready-mixed concrete and against eight company directors alleged to have operated price-fixing and market-sharing agreements . It is the second time in three years that some producers have faced contempt proceedings involving subsidiaries . If found guilty again , the companies could face unlimited fines and directors could be fined or imprisoned for up to two years , according to the Office of Fair Trading , which brought the charges . In the latest action , nine companies are alleged to have broken court orders and undertakings not to operate price-fixing and market-sharing agreements in north-west England , East Anglia , the east Midlands , London and the home counties . They are : Hartigan Readymix of Newport Pagnell ; Mixconcrete , London ; Pioneer Concrete ( UK ) , London ; Tarmac Roadstone Holdings , Wolverhampton ; Willment Ready Mix Concrete , London ; and four subsidiaries of RMC , the world's biggest concrete company - Ready Mixed Concrete ( Eastern Counties ) , Ready Mixed Concrete ( London ) , Ready Mixed Concrete ( North West ) , Ready Mixed Concrete ( Transite ) of St Albans . Sir Bryan Carsberg , director-general of fair trading , alleges that the companies had breached court orders and undertakings given to the Restrictive Practices Court in the 1970s . Sir Bryan said : 'We have now amassed a substantial amount of evidence to suggest flagrant and widespread breaches of competition law . The evidence also suggests that previous court orders banning collusion have been ignored : the participants must now answer to the court . ' RMC said yesterday that since 1978 it had issued express instructions to staff not to participate in any market arrangement . It said it would defend the legal proceedings brought against its four staff . Three years ago Ready Mixed Concrete ( Thames Valley ) , Hartigan Ready Mixed , 50 per cent owned by building materials group Redland , and Pioneer , a subsidiary of the Australian materials group , were fined a total of Pounds 56,000 for disobeying court orders prohibiting them from entering market-sharing agreements in Oxfordshire . Mr Anthony Hullett , a manager at RMC , was fined Pounds 1,200 .