A senior manager at a City broker accused of making unwanted advances towards a female colleague told an industrial tribunal yesterday there was a 'strategy ' to oust her from the company . Mr Giles Wilkinson , head of production at Willis Corroon , the insurance broker , said there was ' a strategy on behalf of Willis ' to sack Miss Samantha Phillips , an aviation broker , after she had been accused of lying to underwriter LA Hudson to clinch a deal . Miss Phillips , who is claiming unfair dismissal and sexual discrimination , has denied that she failed to inform LA Hudson that she had contacted other underwriters about insurance cover her company was setting up for a client . At yesterday 's hearing in Croydon , south London , Mr Jeremy Flaxman , a senior executive at Willis Corroon who investigated the allegation , said he did not set out in advance to fire Miss Phillips . Mr Leonard Hudson of LA Hudson repeated the allegation against her to the tribunal . He said Miss Phillips had lied when seeking an insurance quote . He said : 'We rely on total trust with brokers and it had broken down with Miss Phillips . ' Miss Phillips was fired in 1992 for gross misconduct . She has said the insurance deal with LA Hudson hit problems because a colleague sent a fax to the underwriter containing an offer of terms to another client without her knowledge . She has said she was sacked because she rebuffed the advances of Mr Wilkinson , who allegedly interrupted a business trip in 1992 to join her in Denmark . Mr Wilkinson denies harassing Miss Phillips and said he had 'categorically not ' planned to dismiss her because she had spurned his advances . Miss Phillips earlier said Mr Flaxman had encouraged Mr Wilkinson to 'score' with her . Mr Flaxman said : 'There are many occasions over the months when she overreacted . ' He said when Miss Phillips complained about Mr Wilkinson's behaviour in Denmark she did not mention sexual harassment . 'If that allegation had been made I would have gone straight to the director of personnel , ' he said .