Tonight promises to be the night that Steven Spielberg , financially the most successful director in film industry history , receives the artistic recognition that Hollywood has long denied him . Spielberg , the director of the hit films ET and Jurassic Park , is the strong favourite to win the best-director award at that annual rite of prize-giving and mutual admiration , the Oscar ceremony . The awards are voted on by the 4,755 leading members of the US film industry who belong to the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences . The award would be for Schindler 's List , a black-and-white film about the Nazi holocaust against the Jews of Europe , which has been nominated for 12 Oscars and has won critical acclaim for its sensitive handling of the subject . His film 's main challenger in many of the Oscar categories could be The Piano , a highly original art-house film by the New Zealand director Jane Campion , which deals with 19th century eroticism in the antipodes . Its star , the American Holly Hunter , is widely tipped for the best actress award . A fistful of awards would be a big boost for the studio which backed Schindler 's List - Universal , part of the MCA group bought by Japan's Matsushita electronics group . Universal has had a mixed box office record in recent years , though it had a huge hit last year with Spielberg 's dinosaur movie , Jurassic Park . Matsushita is said to be seeking other outside investors in MCA . Its Japanese rival , Sony , has acknowledged that it is considering bringing in new investor to its Columbia studios , which also have a mixed record . Oscar rewards for The Piano would be a fillip to Walt Disney , which agreed last May to buy the film 's distributor , a small independent , Miramax . After the mutual back-slapping of Oscar night , Hollywood 's financial brains will return to focus on the film industry 's next big hurdle - its release programme for the important summer season in America . Analysts are forecasting a summer of record US box office returns , thanks to a group of potentially strong selling films , including a new animated feature from Disney called the Lion King . None of them , however , is likely to match the success of Jurassic Park last summer .