International coffee prices yesterday staged their highest daily rise for nine years when benchmark futures contracts increased Dollars 91 a tonne . The jump came as other commodity markets showed big gains . Copper prices soared to their highest level in 10 months , helped by news that London Metal Exchange stocks of the metal had fallen by 3.5 per cent to their lowest level since July last year . Oil prices rose by 50 cents to Dollars 16.05 a barrel for North Sea Brent crude after the outbreak of fighting in Yemen . Cocoa and aluminium prices also made modest gains on the back of the surge in the other markets . 'It 's a classic commodity bull run , but it is still sporadic and it 's too soon to talk about commodity prices pushing up inflation , ' said Mr Lawrence Eagles , commodities analyst at GNI brokers in London . The recent price surge , which has seen the London Commodity Exchange 's July coffee futures contracts rise 10 per cent this week to a five-year high of Dollars 1,789 a tonne , has been exacerbated by speculative money pouring into the commodity markets . 'The funds tend to treat commodities as a group and with one going up they pile into them all , ' Mr Eagles said . The strength of the US economy has prompted rising demand for basic raw materials such as oil , copper and coffee . Stocks of these commodities are low after five years of depressed prices . Stocks of LME copper are now 26 per cent below February 's 16-year peak , pushing the price of copper for delivery in three months up Dollars 52.75 to Dollars 2.027.50 a tonne yesterday . The price has recovered by more than 25 per cent since it reached a six-year low of Dollars 1.613 in the autumn . Oil prices have risen sharply in recent weeks from a low of Dollars 12.90 in mid-February . Although Yemen is not a big oil exporter , the outbreak of fighting coincided with a perception in the markets that supplies could become tighter . The oil price is also being sustained by a flurry of buying by refiners , who until recently had delayed purchases of crude in the hope that prices might weaken . Goldman Sachs , the US investment bank , said that its commodity index , which tracks the prices of 20 commodities , rose 4.4 per cent in the first quarter of the year and is forecast to increase by 2.5 per cent over the next year . But producers say prices are only just beginning to return to levels at which they can make a profit . 'Overall , producers ' revenues have halved to Dollars 5bn a year in the past five years and they can not afford to fertilise their crops , ' said Mr Nestor Osorio , Colombian coffee representative in London . Coffee shows the way , Page 12