North Korea 's agreement to allow international inspections of seven nuclear plants was yesterday greeted with qualified relief by South Korea and Japan . 'Japan welcomes that decision , ' said Mr Masayoshi Takemura , chief cabinet secretary . However , North Korea must now accept inspections of two more undeclared nuclear sites , not included in the agreement , he said . Both Seoul and Tokyo said more needed to be done to resolve suspicions over North Korea 's nuclear programme . 'This is only a beginning , ' said Mr Hong Soon-young , the South Korean vice-foreign minister . Japan 's opposition Liberal Democratic party , was scathing about the accord between North Korea and the International Atomic Energy Agency , describing it as full of ambiguity and criticising the government for failing to compile any 'crisis management programme ' to deal with North Korea 's nuclear ambitions . Mr Ryutaro Hashimito , a leading LDP policy maker , urged the government to take a firm stand on possible economic sanctions against Pyongyang . North Korea 's suspected nuclear weapons programme has caused growing alarm among its former Japanese colonial rulers , especially since Pyongyang last year tested a missile that could have reached Tokyo . North Korea 's decision to admit inspectors from the agency also , to Japan's relief , reduces US pressure for sanctions against the communist regime . One of the few points of accord between prime minister Morihiro Hosokawa and US president Bill Clinton last week was to co-operate in imposing sanctions on North Korea , if it continued to refuse inspections . Seoul indicated it would make concessions in response to North Korea's agreement with the IAEA . Officials suggested that the US and South Korea will soon announce the suspension of this year 's joint annual 'Team Spirit' military exercise , long a source of controversy with North Korea . Other measures North Korea must undertake to dispel suspicions about its nuclear intentions , according to officials in Seoul , include : Accepting special inspections of two undeclared facilities , which are believed to be nuclear waste sites . They could provide evidence of whether North Korea has processed more weapons-grade plutonium than it has declared . Full return to the non proliferation treaty . North Korea claims its NPT membership is still under suspension and that it is under no obligation to respond fully to IAEA demands . The issue of whether North Korea will allow future regular inspections is apparently still open to question . Implementation of the 1991 North-South Korean agreement on de-nuclearisation . Spot inspections of suspected North Korean nuclear facilities , similar to the demands made by the IAEA , have been a main stumbling block to the agreement 's implementation . Talks between the two Koreas on the issue have been suspended for more than a year . South Korea is hopeful that bilateral talks with the North on nuclear inspections and other issues could begin soon .