For the past 10 years a 90-tonne machine has been tearing around an elevated concrete track in north-west Germany , reaching speeds of up to 450kph but making none of the noise made by aircraft travelling at that speed . It is the Transrapid high-speed train , also known as the whispering arrow . Now , after years of debate , the German government has approved plans to build a 284km track between Berlin and Hamburg , Germany 's two biggest cities , in a move that is expected to take passengers away from those airlines flying the route . The Transrapid will be the world 's first long-distance transport system propelled by magnetic levitation , a technology that Thyssen , the German conglomerate , has been developing . Instead of conventional engines , the Transrapid is propelled by magnetic fields . It has no wheels and rather than run on conventional railway tracks it clutches a concrete runway rather like the runner on a curtain rail . The technology dates from the 1920s when Hermann Kemper , an electronic engineer who ran a meat packing business near the present 32km test site in Emsland , began poring over papers about the theory of magnetic levitation . Kemper developed a model in his cellar where objects were fired along runways by passing mains electricity through electromagnets mounted on the objects and on the runway . In 1934 he registered his patents and tried unsuccessfully to persuade Siemens , the electronics company , to take up his ideas . What was missing , according to Hans Georg Raschbichler , an engineer from Thyssen Henschel , the locomotive builder , was the means to produce and transport large amounts of electricity at split-second intervals . 'They did n't have the sort of high-tech electronics which exist today , ' he says in his office in Munich . Now that large amounts of electricity can be passed around a grid and engineers can regulate the 10mm gap between the runway and the vehicle , two key bits of technology are available which mean that Kemper 's model can become a real ity . The Transrapid operates on different principles from the maglev technology used elsewhere in the world . Conventional magnetic levitation works by using the repellant force of superconductive magnets of opposite polarities . In the Transrapid , propulsion comes from the force of magnetic attraction . By passing electrical current through a stator pack , the stationary part of an electric motor which is laid out on the underside of a concrete runway , a wandering magnetic field is created . This magnetic field - called wandering because it moves down the runway - is attracted or excited by levitation magnets mounted on the underside of the Transrapid , so propelling the vehicle forward . The Transrapid picks up speed proportional to the increase in electrical current ; the opposite happens when the frequency is reduced . If there is a power failure , batteries on board the Transrapid are used to power the eddy current braking system and to guide the vehicle to an emergency stop on the runway . The vehicle glides about 10mm above the concrete runway , a gap which is measured by a computerised sensor : if it becomes smaller , the computer orders more electricity , less if it becomes bigger . The process is repeated thousands of times , keeping the gap constant and enabling the magnet to pull the Transrapid . Raschbichler heads a team of engineers at Thyssen Henschel which ran the Transrapid 07 , the seventh prototype , up to a maximum speed of 450kph last year . They are now putting it through 500,000km of tests before it can be licensed to operate . Tests have shown that the vehicle uses less energy and is quieter than the French TGV ( Train a Grande Vitesse ) or the German InterCity Express ( ICE ) , the two high-speed trains which are its main competitors . Stand 25m away from a Transrapid passing at 300kph , and the maximum noise level recorded is 87 decibels - less than a freight train travelling at 100kmh . Tests by independent engineers recorded about 100 decibels for a TGV travelling at the same speed . Because the Transrapid glides above a concrete runway it does not need to overcome the resistance between track and wheels which traditional railway technology still has to grapple with . That means , according to Thyssen Henschel , that the Transrapid uses around 30 per cent less energy than a high-speed train travelling at the same speed . The government hopes that by 2004 a runway - similar to the present test track - will be built and that more than 14m passengers a year will be hurtling between Germany 's two biggest cities . A journey that now takes more than three hours by train will take just 55 minutes by Transrapid . The DM5.6bn ( Pounds 2.3bn ) needed to finance the runway and infrastructure will be put up by the federal government , and Thyssen has created a company together with Lufthansa , the national airline , and Deutsche Bahn , the state railway , which have to find DM4.8bn to operate the service . The Japanese are working on similar technology but opted in the early 1970s for an electrodynamic levitation system - where magnets repel rather than attract each other . The different system also creates a 10cm gap , rather than 10mm , between the vehicle and the runway which the Japanese say is better suited to deal with earthquake risks . The Transrapid technology creates magnetic fields of about 40 amps - no bigger than those created by an electric razor - while the Japanese have to grapple with big magnetic fields of up to 700,000 amps . About four times as much electricity is needed to control the movement of the Japanese train across such big magnetic fields and Thyssen says they are so powerful it is thought people wearing pacemakers will not be able to use the trains .