The Bundesbank 's credibility has been called into question and its monetary management methods have been mocked . But both of these totems , counted among its most prized assets , appear likely to emerge intact from the travails of the past few months . Mr Hans Tietmeyer , the German central bank 's president , may even come through with his reputation as a pragmatic monetarist enhanced . The record of Mr Otmar Issing , the bank 's high priest of monetary orthodoxy , may be similarly embellished . Both , together with their fellows on the bank 's central council , are already a little wiser , and keen on learning more . No one wants a repetition of this year 's experiences with the bank 's main policy guidance system , the M3 monetary aggregate , which went haywire at the turn of the year and is only now settling down . And while the bank's policy-makers seem to enjoy springing surprises with the timing of their interest rate changes , the markets ' bewilderment at their last discount rate cut in mid-May is not an experience they want to repeat . Some signs of new thinking may emerge today after the council 's mid-year review of M3 performance . But it is already plain the over-riding message will be a re-affirmation of faith in monetary targeting . Even though the concept has been dropped in all other leading industrial countries , the Bundesbank insists it is the most reliable indicator of possible inflation . The M3 components of cash or short-term , easily-accessible savings not safely locked up in long-term bonds or other instruments - so-called monetary capital - are a potential threat to monetary stability , it says . Accordingly , the idea that the bank should welcome news that money supply is expanding at double its intended rate would in normal circumstances be beyond belief . But that was the case on Tuesday this week , when it announced M3 grew in June at an annualised , seasonally-adjusted 11.3 per cent , compared with the target range of 4-6 per cent . The fact that the result was better than Bundesbank watchers had expected was one reason for satisfaction . But more important , the fact that the figures showed 'special factors ' that bloated the measure were starting to unwind , tended to support Mr Otmar Issing 's fundamental belief in the underlying virtues of M3 . But the council will today examine a wider horizon than the two percentage point span of this year 's target range . Mr Tietmeyer said yesterday the bank was studying new factors which could influence M3 - 'new phenomena stemming from the internationalisation of capital movements ' . In the light of widespread scepticism about the usefulness of the measure , it may also contemplate ways of sharpening assessment of the apparently endless flow of the distorting 'special factors ' . The effects of German unification , tax changes and currency market interventions , for example , have conspired to keep M3 off track for the past three years . As Mr Tietmeyer suggested , future shocks are more likely than not as Germany becomes increasingly enmeshed in fast-moving global markets . One aim of the central council debate will be to sharpen the efficiency of the bank 's long-range radar . Another will be to improve internal and external communications . Failings in both departments appeared to catch the bank napping earlier this year , when January 's M3 growth figure , a thundering 21.2 per cent , came in accompanied by a bland statement blaming special factors . A sell-off followed in international markets already rattled by fears of rising US inflation . It was not , as Mr Tietmeyer acknowledged , ' a championship performance ' . But conflicting statements and apparently contradictory actions by the bank were later to compound suspicions that it did not really know what was happening to M3 . The liquidity log-jam was refusing to break up . Meanwhile - and contrary to its established practice of raising rates to choke off monetary growth and potential inflation - the bank was seen to be cutting them on the basis of a bright short-term inflationary outlook . The mid-May cut in the discount rate was widely seen as an uncharacteristic gamble by a notoriously conservative institution . That view has moderated now that funds stuck in short-term deposits seem to be moving outside the scope of M3 . An emboldened Mr Issing said earlier this week it was now not beyond the bounds of possibility for M3 to end the year at or close to target . Similarly encouraged , Mr Tietmeyer said yesterday the bank believed there were , so far , no inflationary dangers associated with the latest bout of money supply distortions . Such comforting comments will no doubt go down well in still-jittery markets . More comforting still would be a continuing series of declining M3 numbers for the rest of the year . Even better , and despite recent controversy , another discount rate cut in the interim would be the strongest possible indicator that the Bundesbank had regained its full confidence in M3 , and , crucially , in its ability to interpret and control it .