For the Australian mining industry the much feared 'era of Mabo ' has begun without interrupting the long-standing trend of steadily increased production and export revenue . Mabo is the popular tag given to a watershed High Court decision given legislative effect late in 1993 through the Native Title Bill . The Bill , which broadly gives Australia 's Aboriginal people title to large tracts of the country , had drawn dire predictions from the mining lobby , mainly reflecting concerns about exploration and development access . However , in 1993-4 , the industry has again overcome weak world demand , historically low prices for many key commodities and unfavourable exchange rate movements marginally to lift export revenue to almost ADollars 30bn , accounting for better than 35 per cent of the country 's total export receipts . Figures from ABARE , the Federal Government 's commodities research arm , show that Australia 's mineral exports have risen in all but one year of the past decade . The latest total represents more than double the country 's then record ADollars 14.9bn mineral exports in 1986 . While this performance justifies the industry 's world leader status , demonstrating its inherent strength and diversity , closer inspection reveals some weak spots which threaten to reduce momentum later this decade . The industry acknowledges that the effects on production and revenues may not be felt for some years , given the lead times involved in major projects . But mining executives see Mabo as part of a long term pattern of adversity which includes the rise of environmental issues , compensation claims from landowners , unfavourable tax treatment and vexatious litigation . Mr Geoffrey Ewing , of the Australian Mining Industry Council ( AMIC ) , says the mining industry has long been a leader in negotiating with Aboriginal communities . 'Our argument is not with the concept of native title , but with the way the Bill produces an unwieldy system for exploration and development access , ' Mr Ewing said . 'Any real influence on production and exports is obviously some years off . In fact , our annual financial survey , due out later this year , will probably show a lift in exploration spending in the latest year . But our information is that the spending is mainly on what could be described as 'brownfields ' , sites which are free of any native title claims . ' The Australian mineral industry 's overall performance in the latest year was also distorted by near boom conditions in one commodity - gold - where export value rose by more than 26 per cent to ADollars 5.42bn , masking some serious declines in other commodities . Gold 's resurgence echoes its historical position as one of the main populators of fledgling antipodean colonies more than a century ago . The metal 's more recent Australian history is scarcely less important to national fortunes . From a position of decline in the 1970s , when many of the country 's biggest mines faced closure and annual output ran at less than three tonnes , Australian gold production has rallied close to 250 tonnes in the current year , ranking it third in the world after South Africa and the US . And new projects already under way mean that production will keep rising strongly , barring a collapse in the all-too-volatile gold price . Mr Robin Widdup , gold analyst with J . B . Were & Son , the Australian stockbrokers , told the Financial Times World Gold Conference in June that Australia's annual gold production was likely to top 300 tonnes by the turn of the century . Vigorous exploration and new mine development has transformed the gold industry from the 1980s picture of short life , shallow oxide open pits , to large long life mines in the 1990s , ' Mr Widdup said . 'The 1990s Australian gold rush has seen geologists , armed with new geochemical and geophysical techniques , unearth a series of large new gold discoveries beneath sand cover . 'This breakthrough in technology has lifted exploration expenditure .. and the rate of success shows no sign of slowing . A group of 10 to 15 new mines should lift Australian production by 40 to 50 tonnes over the next five years . ' If gold fulfils these expectations , it could replace coal as Australia's number one export earner around the turn of the century . Gold 's export jump in the latest year compared with a corresponding 5 per cent fall to just under ADollars 7.2bn for coal . Several other major Australian minerals recorded solid export revenue gains in 1993-94 , including aluminium , up 5 per cent to ADollars 1.82bn and iron , steel and ferroalloys , up 22 per cent to ADollars 1.4bn . But zinc exports fell 22 per cent to ADollars 795m . Sticking to a familiar pattern , Australia 's higher overall export receipts were achieved despite markedly lower average commodity prices received . ABARE 's mineral export price index slumped from 99.7 to 91.9 over the year while the index of mine production rose from 105.2 to 107 . Australia is , quite simply , continuing to sell more minerals for less money . The financial performance of its leading commodities companies remains volatile . It 's a habit that will prove hard to kick while the industry remains a price taker , hostage to a small local market and heavily exposed to the vagaries of international trade .