After four years and ten tours , Mikhail Baryshnikov 's modern dance troupe , the White Oak Dance Project , finally opened in New York last week . Why had Baryshnikov avoided New York for so long ? Was it - as certain New York reviewers asked with obvious satisfaction - because of the New York reviewers ? Maybe a little . Baryshnikov 's nine controversial years as director of American Ballet Theater ( 1980-89 ) did not leave him with tender feelings either toward large dance companies or toward the New York dance world , with its 'politics and policies , ' as he put it darkly in a recent interview with The New York Times . When , after leaving ABT , he founded White Oak , he said that this troupe would be 'for fun . ' He wanted to experiment , in a relaxed atmosphere . That is why he hired older dancers . ( The company 's age range is 31 to 46 : no teenagers , no hysteria . ) And that , no doubt , is why he did did not rush to arrange a New York season , which , for almost any company , is a tense , over-advertised , over-analysed , money-losing business . About money , he need not have worried . Baryshnikov is still the world 's most famous dancer , and he performs at every White Oak show . Given that fact , White Oak normally sells out any theatre it enters . New York State Theater was no exception . When Baryshnikov stepped onstage on opening night , so many flashbulbs went off that it looked as though someone had turned on a strobe light . ( Later performances began with a stern announcement forbidding cameras . ) New York may be a tough town but it still loves a star . This very fact - that Baryshnikov alone sells tickets - has led some writers to ask where White Oak would be without him . But such questioning implies that all Baryshnikov does at White Oak is dance , which is not the case . It was he who selected this largely excellent company ; he also chose , and pays for , the superb six-person musical ensemble , headed by Michael Boriskin , that accompanies the troupe 's performances . ( Live music is now a rarity at American modern dance performances . ) Finally , Baryshnikov is the one who put together White Oak 's repertory , and it is stamped all over with his ideas , his history . Baryshnikov defected from the Soviet Union in 1974 because he wanted to dance new roles , not just Swan Lake and Giselle . But in fact he spent most of his early years in the West performing the 'classics ' , for that is what audiences wanted to see him in . Twyla Tharp created a number of brilliant jazz-based dances for him , and he put in guest appearances with various modern dance companies . Still , he had a hard time breaking out of the 'prince ' track , and this left him with an extreme reverence for American modern dance . He has made White Oak 's recent repertory a showcase for that tradition , with works by Graham , Hanya Holm , Jane Dudley , Paul Taylor , David Gordon , Meredith Monk . In the process , he has saved some lovely pieces , such as Holm 's Jocose from oblivion . For the New York season he added a Merce Cunningham piece , the 1970 Signals . Signals looks vaguely like a weekend party . People are lounging around in chairs . One by one , they come forward to dance introspective solos and duets ; then they return to the group . It is as if we were seeing their public lives upstage , their private lives down-stage . In White Oak 's hands , Signals did not have quite the same high-ozone purity as when it is danced by its home troupe , but that is always the case when a Cunningham piece is set on another company , and the lyric power of White Oak 's rendition is a testament to the strength of Cunningham 's work . But Baryshnikov does not just restage modern dance ; he commissions it . His success is this department is mixed . New to the repertory this season were works by two young choreographers . Kevin O'Day , a White Oak dancer , presented the sweet-tempered and well-made Quartet for IV , to music by Kevin Volans ; and Joachim Schlomer , director of Germany 's Ulm Ballet , contributed Behind White Lilies , an agonisingly boring work in which , to judge from their stabbing , palsied movements , the six-person cast underwent some extreme hardship ( the decline of the West ? the crisis of modern belief ? ) to the accompaniment of Schonberg 's String Trio . The most important commission of the season , however , was Jerome Robbins's Suite of Dances , a solo for Baryshnikov to four movements from Bach 's Suite for Solo Cello ( played onstage by Wendy Sutter ) , and this was a real little beauty . Like much of Robbins 's work , it is about the relations between 'natural ' movement and dance movement , but in the relations that Robbins creates going , for example , from what looks like any old hop to a pas de chat to a stag leap to a grand jete - we seem to see ballet flowering , before our eyes , for the first time . This illusion is abetted , needless to say , by the fact that the dancer is Baryshnikov . At 46 he still has a thousand steps , and a line so beautiful that it brings tears to your eyes . But what this dance showcased was his musical imagination , the sheer breadth of his response to music - comic , tragic , puckish , misterioso - and his ability , through steps in time , to conjure those states into being . This was not a solo ; it was a duet , for Baryshnikov and JS Bach , staged by a third master , Robbins . If Baryshnikov 's fame is what sells tickets to White Oak , the tickets are worth every penny . The forthcoming White Oak tour includes Italy ( Milan , April 13-21 ; Reggio Emilia , April 23 ; Florence , April 28 ) ; then , from May through July , the US and Canada ( Philadelphia , Minneapolis , Chicago , Vancouver , and other cities ) .