The US and South Korea will begin talks tomorrow in Seoul on efforts to renew negotiations with North Korea , concerning inspections of its nuclear facilities . The discussions with South Korea over the weekend will involve Mr William Perry , US defence secretary , and Mr Robert Gallucci , a senior State Department official recently appointed to head a US policy group on Korea . A key issue will be whether to drop a demand that North Korea must exchange special envoys with South Korea before the US agrees to hold another round of high-level talks with Pyongyang . North Korea maintains the dispute can be solved through negotiations with the US on possible diplomatic recognition , in exchange for opening its nuclear sites to inspections by the International Atomic Energy Agency . But its refusal to accept a special envoy from the South , who would discuss inter-Korean nuclear inspections , has blocked talks with the US . Seoul believes inter-Korean talks must be held in parallel to US-North Korean negotiations , but there have been recent suggestions in Seoul that the demand may be abandoned temporarily to improve the chances for a diplomatic settlement . The IAEA has warned it may declare North Korea in violation of nuclear safeguards in early May , if Pyongyang continues to refuse full nuclear inspections by the UN agency . The IAEA is expected to seek new talks with North Korea next week on preparations for inspections , which were halted in mid-March . The United Nations Security Council recently approved a statement urging North Korea to resume acceptance of inspections . A second issue will be the schedule for the staging of the Team Spirit military exercise by the US in South Korea this year . Both countries regard Team Spirit as a diplomatic means to press North Korea into allowing inspections , but early resumption of the exercise might derail chances for renewed talks with Pyongyang . North Korea has repeatedly condemned Team Spirit as a rehearsal for an attack on the country . The exercise is expected for the second half of the year if no progress is achieved on the nuclear dispute . Mr Perry will also discuss the strengthening of US forces in South Korea against a possible surprise invasion by the North . Defence preparations would include deployment of US Patriot missiles to destroy North Korean Scud missiles and increased stockpiling of other military equipment .