For a number of years policymakers have recognised that commodity prices may play a potentially useful role in predicting inflation trends . There was even a period in the late 1980s when the seven major industrialised countries formally adopted a commodity price basket to help guide monetary policy . Recent remarks by Mr Alan Greenspan , the Fed chairman , that gold prices are a valuable indicator of inflationary expectations suggest that , at least in the US , commodity prices may once again be influencing monetary policy decisions . The idea that commodity prices may play a causal role in the inflation process is not new . Many economists have emphasised the role of commodity prices , especially oil prices , in the inflationary booms of 1973-75 and 1979-81 and the subsequent disinflation of the 1980s . At the moment , global financial markets have a heightened sensitivity to inflation . Any pick-up in commodity prices could easily spark fears of tightening in monetary policy by the Fed and limit the scope for easing in other countries . The financial markets ' nervousness in part reflects the rise in a range of commodity price indicators over the past year . Yet the links between commodity prices and inflation are complex , and the inflationary implications of the recent increases is far from clear . A commodity price indicator is intuitively attractive for a number of reasons . First , generalised rises in commodity prices can represent early signs of inflationary pressure . Most obviously , a rise in food and oil prices will have an immediate impact on consumer prices . More generally , increases in the price of raw materials will raise industrial production costs , which may then be passed on to the consumer in the form of higher finished goods prices . Second , commodity prices are sensitive to monetary policy changes . A relaxation of monetary policy may lead ultimately to higher inflation as the additional demand generated in the economy boosts the prices of commodities and manufactured goods . But because commodities tend to be traded in highly competitive markets , their prices generally adjust more rapidly than either wages or the prices of finished goods . Commodity prices may therefore serve as an early lead indicator of future movements in consumer price inflation . Third , commodity prices may act as a catalyst to the inflation process . Jumps in commodity prices are generally temporary , and often reverse themselves within two or three years . Yet shocks to consumer price inflation often show a high degree of persistence . To sustain the inflation process , other forces within the economy must therefore act to reinforce a commodity price shock . For instance , a rise in consumer price inflation resulting from a commodity price shock may create upward pressure on wages as workers seek to maintain their real standard of living . This then feeds back into domestic prices , which creates the potential for yet another upward move in wages and so on . Thus an initial shock from commodity prices could have a lasting effect on inflation . The extent to which commodity prices show up in consumer price inflation depends on the source of the shock to the economic system and the policy stance of central banks . If an increase in commodity price inflation is met with tighter monetary policy , this would have the effect of slowing the rate of increase of other prices in the economy . This would alter the relative price between commodities and other goods while leaving the overall rate of inflation unchanged . A commodity price shock should only prove inflationary if it is accommodated by central banks . Clearly the link between commodity prices and inflation is far from automatic . For one thing commodity prices are very much more volatile than consumer prices . This alone calls into question their reliability as inflation indicators . Nevertheless , there is a similarity betweens cycles in commodity price inflation and consumer price inflation in the main industrialised countries as the graph shows . There is also a tendency for peaks and troughs in commodity price inflation to precede those in consumer price inflation . Yet while the linkages between commodity prices and consumer prices are important , they do not seem stable enough to be able to draw strong conclusions about the extent to which consumer prices will respond to any change in commodity prices . Often large commodity price increases can occur because of temporary supply disruptions . Yet in most cases these would be unlikely to have general inflationary implications . For this reason it is better to look at the behaviour of baskets of commodities rather than to concentrate on individual price movements . If the price of several commodities are rising strongly , this is more likely to be in response to global demand conditions than to unusual supply conditions in any individual market . Even so , the signals from different commodity price indices can be quite different depending on the commodities included and the weights attached to each one . The Economist index , for example , shows that commodity prices are up by 12 per cent in dollar terms over the past year . Yet this index excludes oil prices , which are down by 30 per cent over the same period . The CRB index , which includes crude oil but with the same weight as orange juice and the other 19 components , is up by 9 per cent . By contrast , the Goldman Sachs Commodity Index , which includes 19 commodities that are assigned weights reflecting their importance in world production and consumption , shows a rise of 3 per cent since the beginning of 1994 , although this still leaves the level of commodity prices 8 per cent lower than a year ago . So should financial markets be worried about the recent upturn in commodity prices ? Almost certainly not . Although the US and UK economies appear to be growing strongly , the same can not be said for Japan and the rest of Europe . The amount of slack in the world economy is still large , as shown by high levels of unemployment . In this environment it is hard to see how a rise in commodity prices could act as a catalyst for a sustained rise in consumer price inflation . For this to occur labour markets will need to tighten considerably first . Commodity prices may have turned , but this carries few worries for inflation at the current time . David Walton is senior international economist at Goldman Sachs .