For the past eight months the automatic , driverless trains of London's Docklands Light Railway have been shuttling along a new five-mile extension to the suburb of Beckton . The trains have been operating without passengers as software and signalling systems controlling the railway have been tested . Problems in constructing the Beckton extension and installing the systems have delayed the opening for 18 months . Mr Malcolm Hutchinson , DLR managing director , is determined to avoid the breakdowns and delays which followed the opening of the first 7 1/2 miles of the railway in 1987 . It is important that the DLR gets this launch right . It has never really recovered from the poor reputation it acquired in its early years . This was partly because it was designed when Docklands was still planned as an area of housing and light industry and before the building of Canary Wharf turned it into a high-rise office centre . The Beckton extension will bring a large part of east London within easy reach of the line and take the railway within a few hundred yards of the City airport . In a hangover from the poor transport planning which has bedevilled Docklands development , there will still be no station in the airport terminal . The Beckton extension , which starts east from Poplar , is only one of several developments under way . Mr Hutchinson and his team of managers , recruited in November 1991 from the procurement department of the Ministry of Defence , believe they will bring about a rehabilitation of the railway 's image and a period of rapid expansion . The second significant improvement should come in the summer when painstaking work to modernise signalling will be completed and the railway will be open in the evenings and at weekends , making it much more attractive to local workers and accessible for tourists . Original signalling is being replaced with a system incorporating improved safety systems and allowing greater flexibility in train timetables . By the end of this year the DLR expects to choose a private consortium to carry out a Pounds 100m extension of the railway across the Thames . This will take it south into Greenwich and Lewisham , more than doubling potential revenues and traffic volumes . At present the DLR costs Pounds 20m a year to run but takes only Pounds 4m in ticket revenues . Once the line is completed , the DLR is expected to lease it from the consortium for between 15 and 20 years before assuming final ownership . Original plans were for five new stations south of the river and for the present Island Gardens terminus on the north bank to be moved underground . But this would have pushed up costs to nearly Pounds 150m and made the project uneconomic . So the present plan to resite Island Gardens below ground will be dropped and proposals to build the Cutty Sark station in Greenwich town centre will be shelved , although this decision has prompted criticism that the line would then bypass the most attractive location for travellers . Hopes of a sustained recovery of the UK economy and indications that the Canary Wharf development is starting to attract more tenants make improvements to the DLR particularly timely . The Lewisham spur is due to be completed by 1997 , the year before the Pounds 1.9bn Jubilee Line extension provides a direct underground link between Docklands and the West End of London . The Jubilee Line extension will increase the attractions of Docklands for office developers , but will at the same time steal many of the DLR 's customers who now come out from the City . An interchange station between the two lines will be built at Canary Wharf . The Lewisham line , it is hoped , will provide a new source of income and narrow the gap between operating costs and ticket revenues . But by the time this happens , the DLR could well be in preparation for private ownership .