The Common Fund for Commodities is to draw up proposals for a programme of technical assistance to aid commodity producers to trade their wares efficiently . The move follows strong pressure on the Amsterdam-based fund to find a good use for some Dollars 20m , left untouched because it is earmarked for commodity price support operations that have never materialised . Australia , Canada and New Zealand have withdrawn from the fund and others have threatened to follow suit if a solution is not found soon . At its annual governing council meeting earlier this week , the fund 's 105 members agreed to prepare a technical assistance programme that would enable commodity producers to take better advantage of new trading opportunities opened up by the Uruguay Round global trade accords . Mr Bruno de Vuyst , council secretary , says the focus will be on helping countries to organise efficient national and regional commodity exchanges , improving warehousing and advising on relevant legislation . Fund members also agreed this week to come up with new ideas for employing the Dollars 71m of capital contributions in the so-called 'first account ' , including possible amendment of the 1980 treaty setting up the fund . This requires the surplus income from the first account ( after covering Dollars 3m-a-year administrative costs ) to be used for loans to cover buffer stock operations . Since the treaty was signed , price stabilisation accords have fallen out of favour . Only one commodity pact with buffer stock arrangements - on natural rubber - now remains and its members have shown no interest in using 'first account ' resources . The fund , which began operations in 1989 , has also come under fire for the slow start of its 'second account ' programme , which uses voluntary contributions from donors to help finance commodity development projects . However , 27 projects worth Dollars 60m have now been approved ( 21 of them in the past two years ) with the fund contributing Dollars 23.6m . The remaining cash has been raised from other national and international organisations . In a less encouraging development , the governing board failed this week to elect a new managing director after votes split equally between the two leading candidates , Mr Dany Ghekiere of Belgium and Mr Ernest Leung of the Philippines . The present managing director , Mr Budi Hartantyo of Indonesia , is to serve for a further year while countries come up with fresh nominations .