The US yesterday renewed pressure on Beijing to open its markets and stamp out technological piracy , ahead of a General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade meeting next week which is due to discuss the terms on which China would re-join the body . Ms Charlene Barshefsky , deputy US trade representative , said in Beijing that China must open its markets wider to US services industries notably insurance and telecommunications . The US is also demanding that China crack down on abuse of intellectual property rights , which US industries say currently costs them almost Dollars 1bn ( Pounds 600m ) annually . Ms Barshefsky , who is in Beijing for negotiations with Ms Wu Yi , China's foreign trade minister , is pressing China to close 26 factories which the US says are using pirated technology to produce compact discs for export . US officials have been concerned by the discovery of discs throughout south-east Asia and in Canada . The factories can make up to 75m discs a year , Ms Barshefsky said . The US government last month gave China six months to enforce laws to protect intellectual property such as trademarks and copyrights . Without improvement , China faces US trade sanctions on Dollars 800m worth of exports . Ms Barshefsky said her talks with Ms Wu were 'constructive , ' though progress in opening up China to foreign goods was progressing slowly . This week - after weeks of delay - the first shipment of US apples arrived in Shanghai . Though Ms Barshefsky was pleased China was accepting more foreign agricultural goods , she said it was 'unacceptable ' that China was importing apples from only one US state , Washington . Ms Barshefsky also criticised recent statements by China that it plans to offer a 'final ' set of concessions , which were not open to further negotiation , at next week 's talks in Geneva on its application to re-join Gatt . She said Beijing 's approach was 'not productive ' and ' a recipe designed not to reach agreement ' . AP adds from Beijing : The Chinese cabinet has responded to US pressure by agreeing to meet regularly to discuss intellectual property right infringements , an official newspaper said yesterday . The China Daily said the cabinet aimed to draw attention to infringements and had called on state-run media to highlight them .