Three years ago , Austrade , Australia 's main trade promotion organisation , had 18 offices in Asia . Today , it has 30 . The increase speaks volumes for the effort Australian politicians and industrial representatives are putting into expanding links with the region . Last week alone , a delegation of 50 landed in Beijing to promote wool products ; in Tokyo , Mr Paul Keating , Australian prime minister , lauded the benefits of an Asian free trade area to his Japanese counterpart ; while back home , a drive to boost exports of services was launched . Australia 's attempts to build economic links with Asia are usually traced to the early 1970s , and were in part a response to the decision by Britain , Australia 's traditional trading partner , to throw its lot in with Europe . But these efforts have accelerated in recent years - and , in broad terms , are producing results . As politicians enthusiastically note , more than 60 per cent of Australia's exports of goods now go to Asia , compared with 26 per cent in 1960 . By contrast , exports to western Europe ( including the UK ) accounted for only 13 per cent of last year 's total , against 46 per cent three decades ago . The annual rate at which this Asian business is expanding is also impressive , although export growth has slackened from the double-digit percentage increases of the late 1980s . Australia 's total trade with Asia advanced by almost 12 per cent last year , to nearly ADollars 67bn ( Pounds 32bn ) . Exports were up by about 9 per cent , meaning that an additional ADollars 3.3bn worth of goods were sold . Imports rose by 14 per cent . But the need to do even better is paramount . For years , Australia has had a structural problem with its current account , running deficits and then partially funding these with foreign capital inflows . In the 1970s , the trend was for the current account deficit to represent an increasing proportion of gross domestic product . From 1982 onwards , the position stabilised at 4 to 5 per cent of GDP , but did not improve . By the end of 1993 , net foreign debt stood at about 43 per cent of GDP . The current concern is that a strong upturn in the domestic economy will spell problems for Australia 's trade balance . In the upswing of a business cycle , Australia 's imports tend to rise faster than exports , partly because of the need for foreign-made plant and equipment , so worsening the current account deficit . The combination of rising imports and a falling dollar contributes to higher inflation . In response , interest rates have to be raised . In short : boom and bust . A substantially improved export performance would help remedy the situation . As Mr Bernie Fraser , governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia , has put it : 'The best way for Australia to grow faster and escape the external constraints of large current account deficits and rising foreign debt is through increased exports . ' Asia , with its high-growth economies and relative proximity , is the obvious target . If the argument for pursuing Asian trade is compelling , realising this objective is complicated for several reasons . First , Australia has traditionally acted as Asia 's 'farm and quarry ' . Raw materials and unprocessed agricultural produce - primary products - accounted for 55 per cent of total Australian exports to Asia last year . The biggest categories were coal , gold , iron ore , aluminium , beef , wool , crude oil and natural gas . Continuing to rely on these exports means being hostage to volatile price cycles , while growth in demand is relatively slow . Moreover , the vicissitudes of nature can intervene : at present there are concerns about the trade implications of a severe drought in key east-coast agricultural areas . So the focus of the government 's export drive falls on 'elaborately transformed manufactures ' or ETMs - a trade department category which covers 'products with unique features which permit their identification as differentiated products on world markets ' ( that is , skim milk powder does not count , while branded Macadamia nut chocolates do . ) ETM exports have been growing more quickly than exports overall , and now account for about 14 per cent of total sales to Asia . But trade officials admit it can be difficult to make inroads : ' I think we , and everyone else , find ( the Japanese market ) quite hard work , ' says Mr Ralph Evans , head of Austrade . Second , the mix of export destinations looks slightly less healthy when examined in detail . Japan dominates the picture , accounting for 25 per cent of Australia 's total exports , and about 40 per cent of those going to Asia . Here , the main exports are beef , coal and iron ore. Orders and prices for the latter two have been adversely affected by the Japanese recession and its effect on the steel and power industries . Sales to the China/Hong Kong region , however , are more encouraging . They rose by more than one-fifth in 1993 , and the balance of ETMs to primary products is significantly better . Mr Evans , says this is one of the most important areas for exporters in the next few years , along with Indonesia , Australia 's nearest neighbour . A third problem for the export drive into Asia is the level of trade barriers in the region and Australia 's limited clout in combating them , given its small domestic market and different cultural history . The six countries of the Association of South East Asian Nations , which now have a regional free trade agreement aimed at lowering barriers to intra-Asian trade , are themselves forging links with bigger economies to their north , such as China . It is not clear what advantage , if any , they would see in admitting Australia to their ranks . At a transport conference in Darwin last week , a Malaysian trade consultant made the point bluntly : 'Many people in Asia will need to be convinced that it in is their interests that Australia becomes part of Asia . ' Australia has responded partly by lobbying within the Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation forum , a loose grouping of some Australasian , Asian and North and South American countries . Much play was made in Australia of an internally generated Apec report for leaders of member states , which called for complete trade liberalisation in the region by the year 2020 . But for some companies seeking to export to the region , this - and the latest Gatt agreement - are all-too distant promises . 'There 's a lot of talk , and I know the Australian government is putting on a lot of pressure , but these countries are not moving ( on trade barriers ) , ' says Mr Peter Horeaens , director of Asian operations at Kellogg Australia , the US-based cereal manufacturer . Tariffs on cereal-based products , for example , range up to 60 per cent in Thailand and more than 100 per cent in Pakistan , he says . Fourth , Australia 's ability to aid would-be exporters is more limited than that of some competitors chasing the same business in Asia - a function of the country 's size . 'Compared to Group of Seven nations , we do n't have such deep pockets when it comes to export credit guarantee financing and the like , ' says Mr Evans of Austrade . Finally , and perhaps most controversially , there is a price to be paid for putting trade and Asian relations so high on the agenda . Australia is by no means the only country negotiating the culture clash between western values and those of Asian countries . But if this is a tough problem for a large country with well-defined beliefs like the US , it is every bit as problematic for a country with a small economy which is still trying to establish its own national identity . Trade talks with Indonesian representatives invariably incite demonstrations over the East Timor situation , for example ; ministerial visits to China rekindle human rights concerns ; and so on . Asian trade is a path which Australia has little option but to tread - and it is doing so with impressive determination . But steering a route round the potholes will remain a substantial task . -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- Australia trade : Asia bound -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- Total bilateral trade 1993 Australian dollars bn -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 1 Japan 27.50 2 US 18.25 3 New Zealand 6.72 4 UK 6.40 5 S Korea 6.22 6 China 5.21 7 Taiwan 5.06 8 Singapore 4.87 9 Germany 4.55 10 Hong Kong 3.48 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --