The government is to review more than two-thirds of its road-building programme following the publication yesterday of a report which found new roads could lead to increased traffic . Mr Brian Mawhinney , transport secretary , said 270 road schemes which are at planning stage would now undergo extra assessment to judge their overall impact on traffic levels . In addition , he said future road spending would be concentrated on improving the existing network . Seven big projects , including controversial proposals for the A34 Newbury bypass , would be dropped from the government 's existing programme of about 360 road schemes . The report , drawn up by the standing advisory committee on trunk road assessment - a group of independent experts - says present methods of assessing road schemes can lead to an exaggerated view of their benefits . It concludes that government methods for assessing such schemes underestimate the impact of 'induced traffic ' - journeys made only because the building or improvement of a road makes them possible . 'We conclude that induced traffic can and does occur , probably quite extensively , though its size and significance is likely to vary widely in different circumstances , ' the committee said . The committee 's findings could lead to a fundamental review of the methods used to assess road schemes . Mr Mawhinney said he would commission research to improve the department 's techniques . ' I am determined that important decisions on the road schemes are taken on the basis of the best and most up-to-date methods of forecasting their effects , ' he said . Environmental groups welcomed the report , saying it confirmed their view that building new roads simply encouraged more people to drive . Mr Michael Meacher , Labour transport spokesman , said the findings challenged a method of assessment which was 'rigged in favour of road building ' . The British Road Federation , however , said the report showed new roads encouraged economic activity and that most of the traffic on new roads had transferred from less suitable routes . The publication of the advisory committee report , which was filed with the transport department nearly nine months ago , follows a call earlier this month by Mr Mawhinney for a public debate about transport issues . The department had been criticised by anti-road lobbyists for trying to prevent publication . The announcement on what the government termed a 're-focusing ' of its roads programme follows cuts of Pounds 400m over the next two years in the department 's roads budget . Programmes to relieve bottlenecks on the M1 and M25 , and the M1-M62 link , will go ahead . * Trunk Roads and the Generation of Traffic . HMSO . Pounds 24 . Report details , Page 6