Advice for avoiding cancer : Do n't smoke . Hide from the sun . Eat fruit and vegetables . Join the upper classes . Employ a chauffeur and do n't look out of the car window . Epidemiologists estimate 75-80 per cent of all cancers are preventable , in the sense that they are triggered by features of the individual 's lifestyle and environment . The problem is identifying the avoidable risks . A few are well known and easy to act on ; much the most obvious example is smoking . Most risks , however , are less well defined and harder to avoid . For instance , cancer as a whole is more common - and more likely to be fatal - among the 'lower ' social classes . This is true even when the statistics are adjusted to take account of all known risk factors such as smoking , diet and access to health care . Researchers are coming to the conclusion that there is something intrinsically unhealthy about being near the bottom of the social pecking order , even if you follow the rules for healthy living . Sally Macintyre , director of the Medical Research Council 's Medical Sociology Unit in Glasgow , says the mechanism of this effect is far from clear , though it appears that 'repeated psycho-social stress ' somehow depresses the immune system . Hundreds of different risk factors have been suggested for cancer - some of them an inextricable part of modern life . For example , Australian research has shown a statistical correlation between driving and cancer . The theory is that the brain responds to moving surroundings by priming the body chemically for movement that never takes place ; the resulting chemical imbalance may trigger cancers . More concern has been expressed about man-made hormones , particularly in the contraceptive pill . Clinical studies involving tens of thousands of women have shown no general increase in cancer among long-term pill users , though some groups may be at slightly greater risk of developing breast or cervical cancer . But epidemiologists say people should not be too concerned about minor or speculative causes of cancer , when smoking and poor diet are so much more important . 'One of the biggest myths in recent years is that there is a cancer epidemic caused by exposure to radiation , pollution , pesticides and food additives , ' says Sir Richard Doll of the Imperial Cancer Research Fund 's cancer studies unit in Oxford . 'These factors have very little to do with the majority of cancers . ' Epidemiologists are confident tobacco is implicated in about 30 per cent of cancer deaths in Europe and North America . They are far less sure about food and drink ; a typical estimate is that diet is involved in 35 per cent of cancer deaths . Because there can be a delay of several decades between starting to smoke and the onset of disease , the big rise in lung cancer did not begin until the 1940s among men and the 1970s among women ( see chart ) . The male lung cancer rate is falling in countries such as the US and UK where large numbers of men gave up smoking in the 1960s and 1970s , but it is rising throughout the developing world . Female lung cancer rates are increasing everywhere . Although lung cancer is the most obvious effect of smoking , 12 other cancers are linked to the habit , as well as cardiovascular and other diseases . However , if an individual smoker gives up before becoming ill , he or she can avoid most of the risk of dying from tobacco . Ten years after stopping , half of the smoker 's additional cancer risk will have disappeared . In contrast to smoking and lung cancer , there is no cancer epidemic clearly linked to changing diet . On the contrary , the most striking trend is the long-term decline in stomach cancer in Europe and North America - a fall widely attributed to modern methods of food preservation and storage which prevent the formation of carcinogenic decay products . Although colo-rectal cancer rates have remained steady for several decades in the west , those in Japan have risen rapidly to European levels - probably because the Japanese diet has become westernised with more meat and fat eaten . Epidemiologists say there is overwhelming evidence that a diet rich in fruit and vegetables reduces the risk of cancer . But they do not know how the protective effect works . A favourite scientific theory is that anti-oxidant nutrients , such as vitamins E and C and beta-carotene , play a protective role by scavenging 'free radicals ' which can damage a cell 's genetic material . Food supplements containing these nutrients have become very popular . as a result , although there is not yet conclusive clinical evidence to prove their effectiveness . The next stage , according to speakers at the UK Biochemical Society Conference this week , will be genetic engineering of crops to make more of these protective nutrients . Catherine Rice-Evans , a biochemistry professor at Guy 's Hospital , London , predicts : 'The introduction of plants that have been manipulated to produce more effective anti-oxidants should be possible within five years . ' IN THIS SERIES : NOVEMBER 29 Introduction . The growing toll of cancer worldwide . Why the disease is responding better to treatment in the young . The worldwide market for cancer drugs . Who is spending what on research . JANUARY Diagnosis and screening . Genetic susceptibility . Scans . Identifying cancer markers in the blood . Politics and economics of screening . FEBRUARY Chemotherapy . Drugs to kill rapidly dividing cancer cells . Reducing multi-drug resistance . Anti-nausea drugs and other ways of reducing side effects . Hormone-based treatments . Photodynamic therapy . Herbal and alterative remedies . MARCH Radiotherapy . X-rays . Gamma rays . Neutron beams . Heavy ions . Magic bullets . Antibodies and fusion toxins aimed at cancer cells . APRIL Genetic treatment and other biotech approaches . Gene therapy and anti-sense . Cell migration and adhesion . Apoptosis and cell suicide . Immunostimulants . Cell growth factors . Interferons and interleukins .