Germany 's worst recession since the second world war has caught up with the country 's highly regionalised commercial property market . Rents fell across the board last year and there is a growing volume of empty space as building projects commissioned before the downturn come onto the market . According to Muller International Immobilien , a German commercial property consultant , average rents for prime office space dropped from DM51 a sq m to DM45 a sq m over 1993 , a fall of about 12 per cent . The volume of unoccupied property surged in Germany 's 12 leading cities from 1.4m sq m in 1992 to 2.4m sq m in 1993 ; up more than 70 per cent . The data conceal sharp regional differences . Muller found that Germany's main commercial centres suffered a much more severe recession than the middle-ranking cities . For example , the volume of space let in Cologne and Hanover was at exactly the same level in 1993 as in 1992 while in Dresden and Leipzig , coupled with Essen in the Ruhr area of northern Germany , there was a sharp increase in volume of space rented out . 'These three cities all represent 'young office ' markets at an early stage of development , ' Muller comments . In the east German cities , the market also benefited from a high level of pent-up demand , although this was not enough to stop a 17 per cent fall in rents in Leipzig . The picture for the more highly developed office markets in Dusseldorf , Frankfurt , Hamburg and Munich was much worse . Rentals fell by 29 per cent in Munich and 24 per cent in Berlin while the volume of space let fell by a dismal 49 per cent . Another negative factor was the surge in unoccupied space which in the 12 cities surveyed by Muller climbed from 1.4m sq m in 1992 to 2.4m sq m in 1993 . Add in a slight increase in the volume of space under construction , to 5.2m sq m , and the volume of available space after pre-lettings and owner-occupation rose to a record 6.7m sq m - 4 1/2 times the level of space let last year . In Frankfurt , which retained its position as Germany 's leading office property market in terms of rentals levels and volume of space let , the volume of unoccupied space has surged in the past two years . Including peripheral locations and offices under construction , the volume of unoccupied space in Frankfurt stands at 1.3m sq m ; five times the 250,000 sq m let last year . Up until the 1991 building boom , unoccupied space had for years averaged a modest 150,000 sq m. Notwithstanding the space overhang , the future of the Frankfurt market is far from bleak . The decision to site the future European Central Bank in Frankfurt will consolidate the city 's role as continental Europe 's leading financial centre . Independent of this decision , foreign banks have steadily devoted greater resources to the German market . It is the international flavour of the Frankfurt office market , with demand dictated to a large extent by foreign financial institutions , which has driven the fall in rentals in the city . Last year , the highest rent achieved was DM75 a sq m , a long way from the near-DM100 a sq m levels of 1991-92 . When the world economy recovers it is to be expected that foreign institutions will continue to upgrade their commitment to Finanzplatz Germany - Germany as a financial centre - to Frankfurt 's advantage . In other cities , the property downturn was triggered more by the domestic recession . Munich was the worst hit , reflecting the impact of the recession on sectors such as electrical engineering , computer technology , aerospace and vehicle manufacture , all strongly represented in the Bavarian capital . Berlin has also suffered as a result of the recession , but the political doubts hanging over the city 's future - another negative for the office property market - have to some extent been lifted by the German parliament's reaffirmation that Berlin will become reunited Germany 's capital by the end of the decade . With the German economy making at best a slow recovery in 1994-95 - and at worst entering into the second stage of a 'double-dip ' recession - the German office property market is set for further consolidation . An underpinning of the market is , however , likely to come from international investors looking for bargains and from the domestic open-ended property funds , a form of investment vehicle which has proved highly popular with individual investors over the past year . According to Mr Oscar Kienzle , head of Knight Frank & Rutley 's German operations , there is DM10bn invested in the funds , pent-up demand equivalent to half a year 's normal purchasing activity . This money must , by law , be invested in property , and is likely to provide healthy liquidity support for the German market .