In Tokyo this December , the Christmas trees are out in force , tinny carols are rattling from loudspeakers and thousands of shops are filled with seasonal merchandise . But there is a more than usually hollow ring about the festivities . Money no longer flows so freely in Japan and , without it , people are starting to wonder what Christmas is really about . In a country where less than 2 per cent of the population professes any Christian belief , the celebration was always a copy . The Japanese took Christmas to their hearts not because they wanted to understand what the event was supposed to commemorate . What mattered was that Americans and Europeans were enthusiastic about it . This was enough to show that it must have some value . And so the Japanese set about giving themselves a bigger and incomparably better Christmas than the authentic ones in the west . In Japan , better meant more expensive , and what developed was the brassiest Yuletide in the world . Traditionalists in the west might bemoan the passing of the true Christmas - of carols , midnight mass , and perhaps even spiritual reflection - but in Japan , there never was anything but a commercial , tinselled affair . The story of the Tokyo department store that sold images of a crucified Father Christmas might be apocryphal , but there is little doubt that , to most Japanese , Christmas was never more than an ingenious marketing device : a new way of persuading the financially incontinent to part with their money . The traditional Japanese Christmas ( circa 1989 ) was a dream for the marketing people that focused heavily on the younger generation . Christmas was sold as 'the most romantic time of the year ' and an occasion to cement those special relationships the material way . In the bubble years companies were generous with their winter bonuses , and a really good Christmas Eve meant spending around Y100,000 ( Pounds 645 ) - more than a third of a month 's salary - taking that special someone to a dinner show , exchanging presents and spending a night at an upmarket international hotel . Tokyo 's Tiffany stores were crowded with teenagers and young salarymen in their blue suits shoving people aside to buy trinkets for their girlfriends . Christmas fever was such that to avoid being left without a hotel reservation for next year 's Christmas Eve , the meticulous trend manuals even advised men to wake up early the next day to book a room . But that was in the time of unbridled confidence about Japan 's economic prospects - the days of rapid growth rates and an explosion in wealth . The ending of the bubble economy , and the four sluggish years through which Japan 's economy has since toiled , have made conspicuous consumption irredeemably outmoded among the fashion conscious . Extravagant spending on Christmas Eve is now sneered at as baburee , or a typical 'bubble phenomenon ' , the most crushing of put-downs . 'Eating at expensive restaurants and hotels was n't part of my real world , ' says Mr Nobuhiro Hirasawa , an office worker who says he spent Y45,000 last year wining and dining on Christmas Eve . ' I want to enjoy Christmas without spending so much money . ' But there is the nub . What , to a nation that ca n't tell a crib from a crucifix , is meant by 'enjoying Christmas ' ? The materialist credentials are still impeccable . One thing the new spirit of Christmas means is value for money . The Hot Dog Press , a fashion weekly for young men , has cut its special Christmas pages , once over 60 at the peak , down to 10 . 'Telling people to spend lots of money at Christmas does n't necessary sell the magazine any more , ' says Mr Morihiko Katabuchi , an editor . Instead of the Y50,000 Tiffany pendant or the Y100,000 Cartier ring , Hot Dog suggests its readers buy girlfriends a cafe au lait mug for Y1,400 or a pair of photo frames for Y1,600 . The economic changes have also brought about new tastes among consumers . The search for value rather than brand names has given rise to new types of shops . Discounters , superstores and warehouse-style stores selling one category of goods at knockdown prices are becoming mainstream , hurting the sales of traditional retailers , the department store and the corner stores . But the end of the urge to splurge has done more than prompt a search for value . It has seen the Japanese looking for alternative means of renewal this Christmas . Many are rediscovering their families . In the past , New Year 's celebrations have been Japan 's main year-end family event , with mountains of good luck foods , such as rice cakes , herring roe and seaweed , washed down with sake . But in the past few years spending time with family and close friends on Christmas Eve has become popular . Since Christmas is not a holiday , 'the fall in overtime working hours due to the recession has also helped in getting the family together ' , says Ajinomoto , the largest food and beverages company . That means - well , it means shopping , of course for cheap imported chicken and bargain French sparkling wines . So , it has become a cheap Christmas certainly , and maybe even a family Christmas . But that comes no closer to answering the question , 'Why bother ? ' In the most material of a materialist world , what is a 'Christmas ' without the money ? There is no sign of any religious awakening - the same small groups of the faithful will turn up at the midnight masses at the Christian churches dotted around town . Some will even take to the streets to hand out food and a few comforting words of the Christmas spirit to Tokyo 's growing homeless population . But the vast majority of the population will spend the holiday focused even less on its significance than before - perhaps they are closer to emulating the west that way than they were in the past . One world-weary salaryman provides a hint that perhaps the Japanese have , after years of trying , discovered the real essence of a western-style Christmas . ' I spent about Y30,000 on Christmas Eve last year , including Y10,000 on a bottle of champagne , ' says Mr Chikara Kondo . 'But this year I'm staying home and watching television . '