The free trade agreement that Mexico and Costa Rica provisionally concluded last week has been described as the most advanced between two Latin American countries . It will eventually remove tariff and most non-tariff barriers to trade in goods and services between the two countries ; offer national treatment to investors from each country ; set rules on intellectual property rights ; ease movement of workers between the two countries ; and provide for a panel that resolves disputes arising out of compliance with the accord . Both countries predicted that the agreement would significantly boost Mexican-Costa Rican trade , which stood at Dollars 215m ( Pounds 147.2m ) last year . However , by giving preferential access to each other 's markets , the agreements will hurt the two countries ' existing trade partners , especially other central American states . The negotiations were formally wrapped up last Thursday night , and the text is being written up by lawyers . Mexico 's Trade Ministry expects the agreement to be ready in four to six weeks and to be signed by the respective presidents soon after . The treaty will take effect from January 1 next year . Mexico 's Trade Ministry said Mexican exports of goods that Costa Rica did not produce would be able to enter Costa Rica duty-free from next year . This covers about 80 per cent of Mexican exports , currently at tariffs of about 20 per cent . Tariffs on the remainder of Mexican exports will be reduced over five , 10 and - for the most sensitive products - 15 years . Mexico in turn will allow a majority of Costa Rican exports to enter duty-free in five years or less . Mr Jaime Serra Puche , Mexico 's trade minister , said the agreement was ' . . . without a doubt , one of the most advanced trade agreements between any Latin American countries ' . He said the pact established ' a strong rule of origin that requires goods to be made with inputs of the region ; that is to say from Costa Rica or Mexico , and that this is an important opportunity for Mexican suppliers of inputs and primary materials , since Costa Rica 's supply industry is not well advanced ' . Mr Roberto Rojas , Costa Rica 's trade minister , described the pact as the first step toward Costa Rica 's accession to the North American Free Trade Agreement between the US , Mexico and Canada . An official from Mexico 's Trade Ministry said products would have to contain 50 per cent regional content to be considered Costa Rican or Mexican and free of tariffs . As Mr Serra Puche made clear , such a rule of origin would encourage Costa Rican companies that export to Mexico to source from Mexico rather than neighbouring countries . 'What this accord is promoting is alliances and not competition between Mexico and Costa Rica , ' said the official . 'What we are looking for is that Costa Rican and Mexican businessmen work together . ' This is the latest of a series of trade agreements in Latin America . Trade experts from the region meeting in Santiago last week were warned in a report from the UN Economic Commission for Latin America that there were risks in such agreements , in particular bilateral ones . It said the benefits of such deals 'were fewer when integration agreements involve countries that are only minor trading partners ' . It argued there was a 'possibility that bilateral ( or even broader ) integration agreements signed within the region might have restrictive effects ' . With low tariffs such as those that prevail in Latin America , the benefits of such trade agreements were fewer , it said , and the accords could include other aspects - such as rules of origin - that might discourage trade rather than promote it . It further suggested that the emergence of certain 'hub ' countries , with which most bilateral agreements were concluded , 'can also create incentives for the polarisation of investment in these countries ' . Mr Serra Puche hoped the agreement with Costa Rica would provide a model for similar accords between Mexico and remaining central American countries , over which negotiations were continuing . Mexico 's trade minister expects to meet this month with counterparts from Colombia and Venezuela to discuss their free trade agreement . The three countries had hoped to sign the treaty in January before President Rafael Caldera of Venezuela took office . Although Mexico claimed in December that negotiations had concluded , last-minute differences over rules or origin for chemicals and textiles made signing impossible , however . The new Venezuelan government , less keen on free trade than its predecessor , is said to have insisted on a re-negotiation of the treaty . The Mexican government is willing to meet the Venezuelans and listen to their concerns , but the Trade Ministry official said the agreement could not be re-opened . Additional reporting by Stephen Fidler in London and David Scanlan in San Jose