Prices of coffee futures have more than doubled since the start of the year as world supplies have become tight . The increase has been followed by other markets - such as base metals , cocoa and even cotton - as commodity prices improve in line with the world economic recovery . Peter Swete , managing director of Sabre fund managers - which launched a commodity investment fund this week - says : 'It 's a good time to invest in commodities because they are very , very cheap compared with any other asset . Over the next two to three years , we could see the markets go up substantially . ' The last time coffee prices soared , late in the 1970s , consumers stockpiled supplies to beat price increases . There are , however , other ways commodity investors can benefit from rising markets , depending on their capacity to take on risk . Probably the riskiest is to become involved directly in futures trading . This , though , is only for the most sophisticated and wealthy investors who can afford to lose money if things go wrong . GNI , a London brokerage firm which takes on a number of private clients , usually demands they have a minimum Dollars 20,000 available as risk capital . Commodities trading should be seen as a way to diversify a traditional portfolio with holdings of equities , bonds and foreign exchange - not as a way to make easy profits on a core investment . Advisers say individuals should not put much more than 5 per cent of their investment capital into commodities . Investors can buy a large market exposure with a small down-payment in the futures business , but prices can be fast-moving and volatile . GNI 's Nigel Avey says : 'If someone is not 100 per cent sure that they want an active dealing relationship with the firm - that is , with a broker who wants instructions on a daily basis - we would steer them away from futures trading . ' Two indices , both of which trade as futures contracts , offer a way to play on a wide range of commodities by investing in one product . The Goldman Sachs commodity index and the Commodity Research Bureau index both provide a spread of risk across the markets . But a much 'safer ' and traditional investment method has been through putting money into such natural resource companies as those in mining and oil . Many retail brokerage firms offer commodity and energy unit trusts or investment funds , such as the M & G Commodity and General unit trust which has attracted Pounds 28m . Such investments can provide some of the potential gains from rising commodity prices without the huge swings associated with the futures market . But investors who want direct exposure to commodities , with some of the up-side offered by futures , can go for a managed futures fund . These have become very popular in the US but are relatively small in the UK , where futures and options funds were sanctioned by the investment authorities only four years ago . Sabre 's commodity recovery fund is an offshore vehicle designed to limit some of the risk associated with futures . Its aim is to invest in rising markets but liquidate its holdings as soon as a fall in prices seems imminent . The fund also has limits on the amount of cash it can put into each market sector at any one time , as well as the amount of gearing it can take . This cautious approach means it does not risk calamity in any one market , but it also cuts out some of the benefit of large market moves . Before coffee rose by another Dollars 1,000 a tonne last week after frost damaged crops in Brazil , Sabre had halved its exposure to this commodity because its technical charts signalled that the surge in prices was overdone . 'That 's okay , ' said Swete . 'It had already doubled in price . '