French businesses , formerly the most chauvinistic in Europe when it came to buying company cars , can no longer be relied upon to support Renault , Peugeot and Citroen by keeping Japanese cars out of their fleets . Corporate barriers to the purchase of Japanese cars are tumbling throughout Europe , according to the latest survey undertaken by Monks Partnership , a UK remuneration adviser . In 1991 , not one French-based company would own up to being prepared to buy Japanese cars . In Monks ' latest survey of 650 companies throughout Europe , published yesterday , 35 per cent of the more than 80 French companies surveyed said they were opening their garages and car parks to Japanese vehicles . Mr David Atkins , a Monks ' spokesman , said : 'That does n't mean to say that Japanese company cars are already numerous in France . It will take time for the effect of the policy changes to show up in cars purchased . 'Also , the figures are heavily influenced by multinationals starting to standardise their company car policies across Europe . Nevertheless , the trend towards greater acceptability of Japanese cars is unmistakable . ' The number of companies willing to buy Japanese cars has increased - in some cases very sharply - in nine out of the 12 countries surveyed . Among the biggest jumps , 80 per cent of Austrian companies say they will now allow Japanese cars in their fleets , compared with 25 per cent in 1991 ; 67 per cent of Swedish companies , up from 17 ; 64 per cent of Spanish companies up from 35 and 80 per cent of Dutch companies , up from 42 . Only Italy and Denmark saw the trend put into reverse , with 42 per cent of Italian companies prepared to buy Japanese - down from 50 per cent - and 25 per cent of Danish companies , down from 43 . Half of Irish companies surveyed would put such cars in their fleets , the same as in 1991 . Anecdotal evidence from the survey indicates that the growth in production of Japanese cars in Europe is breaking down the deeply-entrenched resistance to buying Japanese . European Company Car Survey 1993 . Monks Partnership , Debden Green , Saffron Walden , Essex CB11 3LX , UK . Pounds 195 Sales of new cars rise , Page 6 Price is right , Page 9