The Russian government will scrap oil export quotas soon and oblige producers to supply up to 65 per cent of their crude oil output to domestic refineries in the first quarter of next year , Interfax news agency said , reports Reuters from Moscow . It quoted Mr Andrei Dogayev , deputy foreign economic relations minister , as saying that a resolution , due to take effect on January 1 , had already been 'definitively agreed ' . Mr Dogayev said that crude oil and refined oil product exports would continue to be regulated by tariffs and other methods . The system of 'special exporters ' , under which all oil exports must go through a limited number of approved companies , would be maintained , he said , adding that 14 companies currently had the right to export crude oil . The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund have opposed the special exporter system and compulsory supplies to domestic consumers , linking further credits to Russia to liberalisation of the oil export system . Mr Dogayev doubted that the lifting of oil export quotas would lead to a significant increase in exports at the expense of the domestic market . He said that exports would be limited by demand factors and the capacity of oil export pipelines . Russian oil pipelines are reported to have been pumping at close to capacity this year to the main export ports of Novorossiisk and Ventspils . There is some unused capacity on the Druzhba pipeline route to eastern Europe , but slumping demand there has curtailed deliveries in this direction . Last year 's crude exports outside the former Soviet Union were about 80m tonnes and officials say this year 's figure will be more than 85m tonnes . Mr Boris Yeltsin , Russian president , issued a decree in May abolishing export quotas and licences from July . But he postponed putting the move into effect until January amid widespread concern that producers would rush to export and leave domestic enterprises without fuel . Domestic crude oil prices are less than a third of world market levels .