Germany 's money supply grew at a much lower than expected annual rate of 8.2 per cent in August , but the Bundesbank made clear yesterday it would keep a firm hand on monetary policy to secure steady economic growth and lower inflation . With the economy recovering speedily , the Bundesbank is concerned to prevent consumer prices from accelerating . In a speech made with next month's general election strongly in mind , Mr Gunter Rexrodt , the economics minister , forecast an economic growth rate for 1995 of 3 per cent after 2.5 per cent this year . He also said unemployment would fall by 200,000 jobs next year . Before the Bundesbank 's M3 announcement , financial markets had been nervous that the expansion rate of money supply might again have exceeded 9 per cent . German bond prices fell sharply on Tuesday on such concerns . In July , the annualised growth rate for M3 was 9.8 per cent ; in May , it was still as high as 15.4 per cent . Despite the success in bringing down money supply growth , however , Mr Johan Wilhelm Gaddum , the Bundesbank 's deputy president , said it was still concerned about inflation . 'We can not be satisfied with the present rate of price increase . ' In August , the west German inflation rate was 3 per cent compared with the Bundesbank 's goal of 2 per cent . Mr Gaddum said the price outlook had improved now that fiscal and wage trends were moving in a more moderate direction . 'Yet the progress towards stability still does not mean it is time to sound the all clear in the battle against inflation . ' This reaffirmation of the Bundesbank 's anti-inflationary stance , and the stressing of its continued commitment to money supply targets , has led some economists to conclude it is unlikely to cut interest rates further . Others , though , expect one more cut after the election . The last reduction was in May when the discount and Lombard rates were cut to 4.5 and 6 per cent respectively . Mr Gaddum indicated last week there was no reason to cut rates now . The May cuts were aimed at shifting funds from short-term deposits , which show up in M3 , to longer-term investments , which do not . This move helped reduce money supply growth and Mr Gaddum added yesterday that the Bundesbank was confident the M3 rate would continue falling towards the 1994 target range of between 4 and 6 per cent . The Bundesbank said one reason for lower M3 growth in August was a switch of funds from short-term deposits to Luxembourg-based money market funds offering slightly higher yields . Money market funds , allowed in Germany since August , are not part of M3 ; about 20 such funds , registered in both Luxembourg and Germany , have either been set up or are awaiting approval . Lex , Page 24