IBM has plunged in one year from the third most valuable brand name in the world to the bottom of a league table of 290 brands , according to an annual survey that attempts the controversial task of evaluating 'what 's in a name ' . Coca-Cola is ranked number one in the league table , with a brand name worth nearly Dollars 36bn ( Pounds 23.6bn ) followed by Marlboro at Dollars 33bn , Nescafe Dollars 12bn , Kodak Dollars 10bn and Microsoft Dollars 10bn . The survey , to be published by the US magazine Financial World on August 2 , uses a complex formula to arrive at its rankings . After breaking down company earnings by brand , it then subtracts what it calculates would be earned on a basic , unbranded version of the product . To that figure it applies a 'brand strength ' multiple based on factors such as market position , degree of internationalisation and trends in the sector . Using the formula - which was originally developed by Interbrand , the UK-based brand consultancy - the value of the Compaq name climbed 149 per cent in 1993 to a value of Dollars 4bn and a league table position of 21 , compared with a position of 65 in 1992 . Meanwhile , IBM 's name now has a negative value , says Financial World . That means that plant and equipment expenses and taxes wiped out any brand earnings . Other brands falling into this 'negative worth ' category include : Del Monte , Siemens , Corning , Krups , Moulinex , Michelin and Pirelli . The magazine says : ' A competing generic product could have generated higher profits on the same level of sales . ' Evaluating brands , and attempting to capitalise them as intangible assets on balance sheets , is a controversial area . Last week Sir Michael Perry , chairman of Unilever , the Anglo-Dutch consumer products group , criticised 'fancy brand accounting ' in a speech in London to the Advertising Association . 'The seemingly miraculous conjuring up of intangible asset values , as if from nowhere , only serves to reinforce the view of the consumer sceptics , that brands are just about high prices and consumer exploitation . At Unilever we have consistently rejected this approach , ' he said . Financial World points to IBM 's failure to switch into personal computers , 'and as PCs became more and more of a commodity , they began selling more and more on price ' . But it adds : 'The fact that PCs are still referred to as 'IBM-compatible ' is something IBM can capitalise on . ' The survey identifies Green Giant , the canned and frozen vegetables brand , as one of the 'great comebacks ' . The brand went up in value by 188 per cent to Dollars 400m .