Sales fever is spreading to house insurance . Halifax , the UK 's largest building society , last week announced cuts averaging 20 per cent for building cover . Since then evidence has grown of an escalating price war . AA Insurance , which sells policies on behalf of 40 insurers , yesterday said the average cost of house contents policies had fallen by more than 1 per cent since July . It would have been greater if the 2.5 per cent Insurance Premium Tax had not been imposed in October . The AA 's latest insurance price survey , due for release early next year , shows rates for building insurance policies dropping by about 2.5 per cent since July , excluding IPT . Churchill Insurance , one of the new breed of 'direct insurers ' selling via the telephone and cutting out brokers ' commissions , said its buildings policies were 7 per cent cheaper than a year ago . Contents premiums have fallen 2 per cent . Cornhill Insurance , which offers building and contents insurance , yesterday announced that it was following Halifax 's lead in offering no-claims discounts on some household policies as well as discounts for older policyholders . Such signs are good news for consumers who , in recent years , have become accustomed to crime and bad weather leading to rapidly rising insurance premiums . They are less welcome for shareholders , who have seen profit forecasts cut for large insurance companies - many of which have only recently returned to making healthy profits . Several factors are increasing competition . Most obviously , fast-growing 'direct ' sellers such as Churchill and Royal Bank of Scotland 's Direct Line are anxious to build market share in the home insurance sector . But consumers are also becoming more price sensitive . Traditionally , most structure and contents policies have been sold by building societies at the same time as mortgages . More than half of people taking out combined policies for the first time continue to use this route , according to a survey earlier this year by NOP , the polling organisation . But the number of policyholders switching from one company to another - currently about 10 per cent a year - is increasing , NOP suggested . Worryingly for banks and building societies , which in recent years have enjoyed healthy profits from selling insurance products , about 21 per cent of 'switchers ' choose direct insurers . Such trends explain Halifax 's high-profile price cuts last week . But building societies have another reason for examining the cost of insurance products they sell . From next year Treasury rules are expected to allow societies to underwrite , as well as distribute , insurance policies . That will put pressure on the current system by which societies sell polices provided by composite insurers ( most of Halifax home insurance products , for instance , are supplied by Sun Alliance ) . There will be a big incentive for societies to cut costs and take a greater share of profits by becoming insurers in their own right . Certainly the scope for cutting household insurance premiums further is considerable . Over the past year insurance companies have benefited not only from higher premiums set in previous years , but also from a dramatic fall in subsidence claims , helped by wetter weather . Theft has fallen too , while natural disasters have been infrequent . Computers allow insurers to assess risks more accurately , enabling them to set premiums almost on a household by household basis . For instance , Royal Insurance says it uses all the characters of postcodes to judge likely claims . Typically , insurance companies are this year reporting underwriting profits of about 20 per cent on household insurance premiums - far higher than for most other insurance products . Profit margins are still higher when income earned by insurance companies from investing premiums is added . Building societies and brokers take another slice of the price paid by policyholders . The size of that cushion illustrates the room for insurers cutting prices next year - and still making a decent return . 'You can halve the profit margin and it 's still very exciting , ' said Mr John Chester , insurance expert at SG Warburg . But as they cut premiums , insurers will have at least half an eye on the longer term . Household insurance policies have to make substantial returns most years because once in a while there is a large natural disaster resulting in big losses . The UK has escaped lightly in recent years so there are insurance bargains to be had . But good times can not last for ever .