The possibility that Britain 's last operating tin mine - South Crofty , near Redruth - might close down raised emotions in Cornwall but it created not a ripple of interest elsewhere in an industry decimated over the past 10 years by mine and smelter closures . Those left in the industry are obsessed by one question : when will the Chinese government gain tighter control over its recalcitrant tin miners and stop them pouring exports into the west ? These exports , they claim , are destabilising the market and preventing tin producers from benefiting from the improvement in world economic activity . 'We expected the tin price to reach about Dollars 6,000 a tonne by now , ' says Mr Fidelis Madavo , tin specialist at the CRU International consultancy group . 'But here it is struggling along at Dollars 5,000 to Dollars 5,100 . ' The tin market has been in turmoil since the sudden collapse in 1985 of a price support scheme operated by the producers ' International Tin Council , which was backed by the governments . The huge stocks accumulated by the ITC -more than 40,000 tonnes - have been a malign influence on prices ever since . Tin had already been struggling in the early 1980s because a big chunk of its market - for beverage cans - was being won away by aluminium producers . This trend started in North America , where aluminium 's share of the beverage can market has risen from 15 per cent in 1973 to 93 per cent , and it has been a growing threat in other industrialised countries too . Also thinner coatings of tin are being used on tin-plated steel cans . Nor have the metal 's main other uses been particularly buoyant . Its use in solders , now the principal application , increased throughout the 1980s as did its use in chemicals . But in 1993 tin consumption was 30 per cent below its peak 20 years previously . In an effort to whittle away the former ITC stocks , a group of producers formed the Association of Tin Producing Countries - its aim to voluntarily restrict exports . The scheme has not worked well . Unexpected and unrestrained exports from Brazil - not a member of the ATPC - caused havoc in the early years . Then China , now the world 's biggest producer , continued to pump large quantities of the metal into export markets . The collapse of the former Soviet Union , once a substantial consumer of tin , added to the producers' difficulties . Today the ATPC faces its greatest challenge because after much persuasion China joined in April this year . But it has flagrantly been exceeding its export quota . China agreed to limit its tin exports in 1994 to 20,000 tonnes . The official China Daily reported at the beginning of this month that in the first half alone the country exported 24,700 tonnes , a 33 per cent increase on the same months of 1993 . 'The ATPC is a toothless tiger and should be disbanded , ' said one analyst , reflecting a widely-held view in the industry . The China Daily also reported that the Chinese government would tighten up on tin exports in the second half of this year . It did not , however , say how . 'Do the authorities really have control over shipments ? ' says Mr Andy Shaw , tin specialist at the Metals & Minerals Research Services consultancy group . 'China has said it will adhere to certain ATPC recommended limits on exports in previous years even though it has not been a member , but of course it hasn't' Mr Shaw suggests that , if it had not been for China 's exports of refined tin during the past few years , 'the stocks overhang which was left as a legacy of the collapse of the International Tin Council could have been more or less drawn down by now ' . CRU 's Mr Madavo expects China 's refined tin exports to slow in the second half of this year but the 1994 total will probably exceed the 32,000-33,000 tonnes exported last year . China also ships out tin in concentrate ( an intermediate material ) and , when this is taken into account , the export total could rise to 40,000-45,000 tonnes . 'Traditional tin producers are being forced to deliver their metal into London Metal Exchange warehouse , ' Mr Madavo says . LME stocks , which totalled 20,000 tonnes at the end of last year , have climbed to 30,000 tonnes . And , where CRU was earlier forecasting that western world demand for tin would outpace supply this year , it now seems there will be a supply surplus . Consumption is forecast to rise by just over 1 per cent , from 168,000 tonnes last year to 170,000 tonnes and , while western world production is expected to shrink from 141,000 tonnes to 135,000 tonnes , that would not be enough to allow Chinese exports to be easily absorbed . The market also has to cope with steady selling from the US strategic stockpile which disposed of 6,900 tonnes last year . Nevertheless , analysts tend to be relatively bullish about tin 's longer-term prospects . The International Tin Research Institute recently suggested that demand could be boosted by 20 per cent within five years with a number of new applications due to reach the market soon . These include a tin-zinc alloy for plating car components ; inorganic tin compounds for fire-retardant packaging ; lead-free tin alloy for gunshot ; antimony-tin solders with a higher tin content than present lead-tin solders ; and tin bottle capsules , used instead of lead . On top of this , British Steel has announced that its 'Ultimate Can ' for beverages is ready for commercial production . This can , developed with other European tinplate producers , is said to be 30 per cent cheaper than its aluminium equivalent . Mr Angus MacMillan , research manager at Billiton-Enthoven Metals , part of the Royal Dutch/Shell group , says : 'We are cautiously optimistic about the prospects for tin demand over the next decade . 'The decline in consumption in tinplate has run its course even before we consider the implications of the Ultimate Can . But , if producers are to enjoy the benefits of higher demand , when it eventually arrives , they must act to reduce stocks . '