Tens of thousands of users of the Internet , a global 'information highway ' , have had their passwords stolen , leaving their private computer files andmessages vulnerable to intruders . Internet is an international web of computer networks linking about 2m computers in businesses , government offices , universities and homes . Use of the Internet has grown fast , especially in companies which see it as a low-cost international electronic mail system . Up to 1m new users per month are tapping into the Internet , according to data traffic counters . 'Intruders have already captured access information for tens of thousands of systems across the Internet , ' says an advisory issued by the Computer Emergency Response Team , a US-government funded panel of computer experts that oversees Internet security . The alert was issued on Thursdaynight . 'All systems that offer remote access ( to the Internet ) are at risk , ' CERT warned . 'Intruders have already captured access information for tens of thousands of systems across the Internet . ' Secret passwords have apparently been collected illicitly by people using sophisticated surveillance software programs called 'sniffers ' that record the first several words typed by a legitimate Internet user to establish a link with another computer on the Internet . This usually includes a user's name and password . CERT has recommended that all Internet users change their passwords . This is only a short term solution because new passwords may also be illicitly recorded . Expert advice is that computer systems be isolated from the Internet to prevent invasion . Security on the Internet is a rising problem , said Mr Bruce Baker , head of information security program at SRI International . 'There are now many , many peopledoing unethical things on the Internet . ' Thesecurity problems on the Internet raise questions about future 'superinformation highways ' that the Clinton administration is promoting as a boon to the US economy and society .