United Microelectronics , a Taiwanese semiconductor manufacturer backed by the Taiwan government , has filed actions in Taiwan and France disputing a critical microprocessor patent held by Intel , the world 's largest chip maker and the dominant supplier of microprocessors to the personal computer industry . The UMC actions coincide with the long-delayed introduction by the Taiwanese company of a 'clone ' of one of Intel 's top-selling microprocessors , the Intel 486 . Intel makes about 80 per cent of microprocessors that go into PCs and has vigorously defended its property rights against other chip makers . Facing a likely legal challenge from Intel , UMC took pre-emptive action , said Robert Tsao , UMC chairman , applying in France and Taiwan to have one of Intel 's patents invalidated in those countries . Mr Tsao said UMC intends to file similar actions in other countries . 'Anywhere they have 338 patent registered , we will invalidate it , ' he said . Intel officials in the US said they have had no official contact with UMC . But the US company plans to obtain samples of the UMC chips and will analyse them to determine if there is any infringement of patents or trade secrets . Intel said it has broad international patent protection on its microprocessors and that UMC is not licensed to use any Intel technology . In interviews last September , UMC officials said they would not sell in the US market when they introduced their microprocessor chip , in order to avoid legal challenges from Intel . The primary target of UMC 's efforts is Taiwan 's large personal computer 'motherboard ' industry . Dozens of Taiwanese companies produce the main circuit boards that go inside personal computers for US and European computer companies . The UMC chip , called the U5S 'Green Chip ' , is a relatively slow version of a 486 microprocessor , suitable for low-end personal computers . UMC said that it expects sales of its new chip to reach TDollars 800m ( Dollars 30m ) this year and TDollars 2bn next year .