At NKK 's Keihin steel complex on a man-made island in Tokyo Bay , nine researchers from seven Japanese steel companies are working on a technique they hope will produce a cheaper , cleaner and more efficient way of making steel . The researchers are in the penultimate year of an eight-year project sponsored by the Japanese government to research the commercial viability of direct iron ore smelting , which eliminates two of the most expensive and messy parts of steel-making . The Japanese are one step ahead of countries such as the US and Australia in the race to commercialise the process , according to Ken Kanamori , a senior engineer from Nippon Steel , who is leading the project . The Japanese team say they have successfully produced pig iron at a pilot plant built next to a conventional blast furnace NKK shut down because of recession . In conventional processing , a standard blast furnace requires the two raw ingredients - coking coal and iron ore - to be processed separately before they are put into the furnace to make molten iron . Coking coal is turned into burnable coke by baking in ovens . Raw iron ore is converted from its powdered state into lumps in a process called sintering . The two materials are then transferred to the blast furnace to be melted into pig iron , which is processed into steel . The Japanese group has removed the need for the separate coking ovens and sinterers by building a blast furnace with two smaller furnaces attached to the top , one above the other . The iron ore powder is poured into the top of the structure and passes through the two small furnaces where it is sintered using gases generated when ordinary coal , rather than coke , is put directly into the main chamber and burned . The iron ore passes through the two furnaces at the top and mixes with the coal in the main furnace to produce pig iron . 'We estimate that the cost of producing steel can be cut by around 10 per cent using this method , ' Kanamori says . He adds that coking ovens and sinterers are the biggest investment a steel company must make . Since Japan 's top five steel makers are expecting to lose a collective Y123bn ( Pounds 779m ) in the six months to September they are likely to consider the Y15bn project ( 75 per cent of it from the government ) as money well spent . The pilot plant produced 500 tonnes of pig iron in a trial run earlier this year . The test used 800 tonnes of coal against the 840 tonnes of the more expensive coking coal normally needed to produce the same amount . The team says the pig iron can also be fed into electric arc furnaces used by mini-mills . Kanamori says the quality of the pig iron is almost the same as that from a regular blast furnace . But it is likely to take at least another 10 years before the process is able to produce steel in large enough quantities to be commercially viable .