Sir , In their otherwise admirably informative review of the current developments in nuclear proliferation and its control ( 'Tick , tick , tick , tick them off ' , August 5 ) Jimmy Burns and Bronwen Maddox make two presentational errors that deserve correction . First , in the accompanying map on the spread of nuclear weapons capability they entirely overlook Canada 's significant nuclear infrastructure . According to the 1994 edition of Nuclear Engineering International 's World Nuclear Industry Handbook , Canada has 22 nuclear reactors operating at seven different sites . Additionally , it has a nuclear research centre at Chalk River , where scientists worked on the Manhattan atomic bomb project , whose technically successful outcome has just been marked with the 49th anniversary of the atomic destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . Canada also has very significant uranium deposits , as has Australia , a country identified as having large civil nuclear capability , although it only has two small research reactors and no commercial reactors planned or operating . Second , your specialist writers misrepresent the text of the nuclear non-proliferation treaty ( NPT ) in saying that it 'permits five countries to have nuclear weapons programmes ' . It does not . The NPT text defines a nuclear weapons state as one which has demonstrably tested a nuclear weapon ( which interestingly itself remains undefined in the treaty ) by January 1967 . It is to conflate the definition of a nuclear weapons state with the proposition that the NPT 'permits ' such a status where both your authors , and the foreign office , are inaccurate . Indeed , under article VI of the NPT each of the states party to the treaty - including the nuclear weapons states - are committed to entering into negotiations in good faith and at an early date towards nuclear disarmament under strict and verifiable international control . This is hardly a permissive commitment to the retention of nuclear weapons . David Lowry , visiting research fellow , The Open University , Walton Hall , Milton Keynes MK7 6AA