This time last year Take That , the teen idols , took on Mr Blobby - and lost . This year East 17 and Mariah Carey are slugging it out against the Mighty Morph-n Power Rangers for the top slot in the 1994 Christmas pop charts . A Christmas number one not only wins the dubious accolade of becoming the year 's office party anthem but is also extremely lucrative . Usually twice as many singles are sold in the two or three weeks before Christmas than in the same period at any other time of the year . The competition for the top of this year 's Christmas chart is hotter than ever . The music industry has rebounded from the recession and had a good year . Record companies have been rushing out seasonal releases in the hope that their artists can cash in on the pre-Christmas spree . Mr Graham Sharpe , who runs a book on the Christmas number one for William Hill , the bookmaker , said : 'This is one of the most exciting Christmas charts ever . There are lots of Christmas singles out there and there 'll be a real race for number one . ' The phenomenon of the Christmas number one dates from 1955 , when Dickie Valentine 's Christmas Alphabet topped the charts . Harry Belafonte continued the tradition two years later with Mary 's Boy Child . There were no truly Christmassy number ones in the 1960s . But the festive spirit revived amid the kitsch ethos of the early 1970s when Slade hit the top spot with Merry Christmas Everybody in 1973 followed by Mud with Lonely This Christmas in 1974 . The 1970s also marked the emergence of Christmas hits as a significant source of sales . Queen 's Bohemian Rhapsody and Mull of Kintyre by Paul McCartney and Wings topped the Christmas charts when they were released in 1975 and 1977 respectively . Each went on to sell 2m copies . They were out-sold by Do They Know It 's Christmas ? , the Band Aid charity single which sold 3m copies and scored two Christmas number ones , in 1984 and 1989 . More recent Christmas hits have had more modest sales . According to the British Phonographic Industry the music market peaked in 1979 , when 89m singles were sold . The singles sector reached its nadir in 1992 , when sales fell to 53m due to the recession and the decline in the number of teenagers -the chief purchasers of singles . The market has since revived as the recession has ended and the teenage population has started to grow . The BPI estimates that singles sales rose to Pounds 95m , or 62m units , in the 12 months to September , a 12 per cent increase from the same period last year . This bodes well for Christmas . Even in the lean years it has been the busiest time of the year for the market as many people who do not normally buy records pick up singles for parties or presents . CIN , the market research consultancy which compiles the singles chart , estimates that a Christmas chart-topper sells between 150,000 and 200,000 copies a week , compared with between 50,000 and 100,000 a week at any other time of the year . Christmas hits have the chance of repeat sales if they are re-released in subsequent years . As a result record companies invest heavily in the Christmas market . Columbia , a subsidiary of the Sony group , recorded its seasonal offering , Mariah Carey 's All I Want For Christmas Is You , in February . Her single went straight into the charts at number six last week and might dislodge East 17 , the current number one , in the new chart when it is unveiled tomorrow evening . East 17 is still ahead in William Hill 's books , with odds of 6-4 , compared with 3-1 for Mariah Carey . But the Power Rangers are steaming up from the rear with odds of 9-2 as they try to follow in Mr Blobby 's footsteps as the 1994 gimmick ticket .