The popular science fiction author Stanislaw Lem wrote a short comic story about an intergalactic pirate who is obsessed with adding to his store of information . Pirate Pugg kidnaps space travellers and forces them to tell him everything they know . He is finally defeated by a contraption that spews out all kinds of detailed but unimportant information such as how many sizes of bedroom slippers are available on the continent of Cob . Pirate Pugg is unable to tear himself away from the growing mountain of information in case he comes across the answer to the 'Ultimate Mystery of Being ' . Sometimes when I 'm roaming the Internet , I feel like Pirate Pugg . There is an incredible amount of information available through the Internet but finding something useful is a frustrating experience . The Internet allows you to access information on tens of millions of computers worldwide , and brings the prospect of a global repository of knowledge , mostly free . Users , or surfers as they like to be called , can access huge amounts of information . There are hundreds of millions of plain-text articles accessible on a huge variety of topics . Newsletters and magazines of various kinds are proliferating on the Internet since it is the cheapest way to publish . There are no printing costs , and almost no mailing costs . The beauty of digital technology is that the digital text can be duplicated virtually for nothing . While putting information out on to the Internet is easy , the problem is finding the right piece of information when you need it . And here is where we need new technologies to help us sift huge amounts of information . Strictly speaking , we should not call it information until we have processed it ourselves . Until it informs us about something we were looking for . Everything on the Internet should be considered as data of one kind or another - it becomes information when we have turned that data into a useful form . But finding a specific piece of data can be a mammoth chore . Formulating a vaguely phrased search can return an enormous amount of leads . Such searches are normally based on the presence of specific key words in millions of documents . Sending out a more detailed search request narrows the choices but here is where the problem lies . Often , a narrow search will non find a relevant and possibly more useful document because it does not contain the keywords or contains them in a low number . What is needed are specific tools that can carry out searches with a certain amount of artificial intelligence - an approach that takes into account the less focused aspects of conducting searches . Such tools are the key to unlocking the potential of the Internet . While many Internet enthusiasts champion the egalitarian culture of the Internet , where many people throw information into a collective repository without concern for payment , there is as yet little evidence to show how useful it is to have access to this huge pool of information . For example , when Gutenberg invented the printing press , it helped generate an information explosion since books could be produced more quickly and more cheaply than ever before . This resulted in the flowering of the Renaissance and the rediscovery of ancient Greek , Roman and Arabic texts that led to establishing modern science and accelerated the move away from feudal societies . Will the Internet and future information superhighways result in a similar impact on society ? Or are we already in information overload and unable to effectively process the information we have access to ? My suspicion is that the latter is true . Many of us seek and hoard information like Lem 's Pirate Pugg but we are often unable to fully make use of it in a meaningful way .