A fierce battle between rival steam railway companies for control of a 23-mile stretch of disused line through Snowdonia national park has been decided this week . Mr John MacGregor , in one of his last acts as transport secretary , gave approval for the Ffestiniog Railway to acquire the railway bed against a rival claim from the Welsh Highland Light Railway . In deciding in favour of Ffestiniog Mr MacGregor overturned the recommendation of the inspector who chaired a four-week public inquiry into the rival bids last year . His ruling clears the way for Ffestiniog , which already runs a successful steam railway over a 13-mile route between Blaenau Ffestiniog and Porthmadog , to create a 36-mile loop through the national park to the tourist centre of Caernarfon on the north Wales coast . Mr MacGregor came down in favour of Ffestiniog in part because of its experience . The company , which employs 60 people alongside 6,000 volunteers , expects to invest Pounds 350,000 in its existing line this year . It carries nearly 200,000 people a year with a turnover of Pounds 2m . Work on restoring a service on the disused track bed could take up to 15 years to complete and cost between Pounds 10m and Pounds 15m . Mr Gordon Rushton , the general manager of the Ffestiniog Railway , is offering the Welsh Highland Light Railway , an entirely voluntary organisation , the chance to co-operate on the project but considerable bitterness remains between the two . Disputes between rival railway enthusiasts are not uncommon . The Association of Railway Preservation Societies said it was a pity so much money , which could have been spent on restoring the railway , had been wasted on legal expenses . The decision in favour of Ffestiniog could be seen as a further small step down the road towards privatising Britain 's railway network . The Welsh Highland bid had the support of Gwynedd county council and a number of other local councils - one reason for the inspector recommending Welsh Highland at the inquiry . But Mr MacGregor concluded that the inspector had attached 'too little weight to the benefits of placing such matters entirely within the private sector ' .