North Korea yesterday refused to hold a meeting requested by the US to discuss the return of a US pilot and the body of his co-pilot killed in the crash of their army helicopter in North Korea . The announcement appeared to dash hopes that North Korea would try to resolve the incident quickly . But , in Washington , US president Bill Clinton said the matter was a 'high priority ' and that he was working hard for its resolution . Mr James Laney , the US ambassador to Pyongyang , said in Atlanta he believed North Korea would release the crew quickly rather than risk endangering relations . North Korean officials explained that their leadership was 'too busy with the investigation ' into the incident to hold talks on the pilot 's release , according to a spokesman for the US military in Seoul . North Korea 's rejection of the US talks proposal could reflect deep divisions within the North Korean leadership on how to resolve the issue . The North Korean military is believed to be opposed to Pyongyang 's recent rapprochement with the US , and may try to use the incident as justification for its stance that the US still represents a threat to the country . The Pyongyang government recently agreed to dismantle its nuclear programme in return for the establishment of diplomatic ties with the US . A long delay in solving the issue of the helicopter crash will increase pressure in Washington for the US to take a tougher stance on aid to North Korea . The two-man OH-58 reconnaissance helicopter crashed on Saturday , three miles north of the eastern end of the demilitarised zone that divides North from South Korea . The North Koreans claim that they shot down the helicopter , but the US says that it may have had to make an emergency landing after straying across the demilitarised zone because of a navigational error . The two-man crew comprised chief warrant officer Bobby Hall and his co-pilot chief warrant officer David Hilemon , who was killed . One explanation for Pyongyang 's rejection of the proposed talks could be that the US wants to discuss the pilot 's release through the military armistice commission which supervises the truce that ended the 1950-53 Korean war . North Korea withdrew from the commission earlier this year in an attempt to press the US to sign a peace treaty formally ending the war , although it still maintains low-level contacts with US military officials at the border truce village of Panmunjom . The resumption of commission meetings on the issue would represent a setback to North Korea 's diplomatic strategy . Mr Clinton said US congressman Bill Richardson , who is visiting Pyongyang , was 'doing a very fine job' representing US interests in the matter . North Korea appears to be using the presence of Mr Richardson as a conduit to resolve the incident . Mr Richardson , a Democratic representative from New Mexico , was originally scheduled to hold talks on the nuclear programme accord before he was thrust into an unexpected role of trying to arrange the return of the pilot .