The Office of Fair Trading has referred the system for compiling the Top 40 and other music charts to the Restrictive Practices Court . The OFT 's action follows a complaint from Gallup , the polling organisation , which lost the contract to compile the charts at the beginning of this month . Gallup argues that it should still have access to retailers ' sales data so that it can compile an alternative to the official charts . The OFT said it had referred to the court the current chart compiling system and the contract previously held by Gallup . The OFT said the present and previous arrangements appeared to be based on restrictive practices , and it would ask the court whether they operated against the public interest . The case is expected to last several years . The contract to compile the charts is awarded by Chart Information Network , an organisation jointly owned by the British Phonographic Industry , the music companies ' trade body , and Spotlight Publications , which publishes Music Week . Spotlight is owned by United Newspapers . Gallup held the contract to compile music charts from 1983 until the end of January this year . CIN said it decided to award the contract to Millward Brown , a rival research company , because it offered a cheaper service than Gallup . CIN said Millward Brown also promised to use more advanced technology than Gallup , allowing the information for the chart to be registered at the same time as a musical recording was sold . Gallup 's technology had meant that sales and chart information were registered separately . CIN collects sales information from the British Association of Record Dealers , which is made up of most music retail chains and the larger independent outlets . Ms Catharine Pusey , CIN 's charts director , said her organisation 's contract with the association specified that only CIN may receive sales data for the purpose of compiling music charts . CIN does not give the information to any company other than Millward Brown . The OFT said it rejected a request from Gallup to declare invalid the agreement between CIN and the record dealers . The OFT said Gallup had benefited from a similar arrangement when it had held the chart contract . Mr John Pinder , Gallup 's charts director , said Gallup had never requested the exclusive right to compile the charts .