The race for leadership in the turbulent telecommunications industry reached Canada yesterday with a bid by Rogers Communications , the country 's biggest cable TV operator , for Maclean Hunter , whose diverse communications interests include a large range of North American cable franchises . Rogers has yet to disclose details of its offer . Although Mr Ted Rogers , founder and chief executive , yesterday described the proposal as ' a strategic merger , ' MH said it had received an approach for a 'possible takeover ' . Rogers has already bought an 8.3 per cent stake in MH , a company which had a market value of CDollars 2.85bn before the bid was announced . Mr Rogers said the board would meet on February 4 , and would make a statement afterwards . MH reacted cautiously to Rogers ' overtures , saying that it would consider a specific proposal 'in light of its other strategic alternatives and with a view to the best interests of MH and its shareholders ' . One analyst said that many MH institutional shareholders might be tempted to accept an offer if it was pitched substantially above MH 's pre-bid share price of CDollars 13.75 . The shares have barely moved in the past two years , but the analyst estimated that the company was worth over CDollars 20 a share for a cash-cum-shares bid . Rogers faces numerous hurdles . The two companies are a study in contrasts . Rogers , which is closely identified with Mr Rogers , is an aggressive , highly-leveraged group with leading-edge technology . It has suffered losses for the past five years , reaching CDollars 124m in the first nine months of 1993 . Besides its 14 cable-TV systems , Rogers controls a national cellular phone network , and is a part owner of Unitel , the long-distance phone company which was instrumental two years ago in breaking a monopoly held by local phone companies . MH , with a history spanning 107 years , is widely-held and conservatively managed , with little debt and a steady dividend . For many years , the backbone of its business was trade publications , newspapers , and local radio and TV stations . However , its cable-TV franchises in the US and Canada last year contributed almost 90 per cent of operating earnings , totalling CDollars 194m .