The recovery in the world iron ore market that began last year picked up strength in 1994 and should accelerate in 1995 , according to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development . It says next year should see the long-awaited reversal of three successive years of declining iron ore prices . World iron ore exports rose by nearly 8 per cent to 398m tonnes in 1993 , leading to a marked reduction in exporters ' stocks , while global iron ore output rose by 2.5 per cent to 942m tonnes . The stimulus from the booming Chinese economy more than offset a sharp drop in mining and steel-making in the former Soviet Union , the report notes . China imported more than 30m tonnes of steel last year , boosting steel output ( and thus iron ore consumption ) in all the main steel-exporting nations . Iron ore imports also soared , by 30 per cent , confirming China's position as the world 's most dynamic market for current and future iron ore demand . Already the largest iron ore producer , China mined 225m tonnes last year , an increase of nearly 15 per cent over 1992 . However , domestic production meets only 70 per cent of the country 's needs , Unctad points out . China 's iron ore consumption rose 16.6 per cent to 258m tonnes in 1993 or more than a quarter of the world total . Unctad says that world iron ore trade remained strong in the first half of 1994 , propelled by even faster growth of Chinese demand , smaller than expected declines in Japan and accelerating economic recovery in most other regions . It expects ' a significant upsurge ' in global steel and iron ore demand in 1995 which 'augurs well for the recovery of iron ore prices ' . Prices have come under pressure from leading consuming countries on the one hand and from strong competition among suppliers on the other , threatening the profitability of the industry and especially high-cost producers . However , Unctad says falling prices have not dissuaded the industry from investing in replacement and additional capacity . Review of the Current Situation and Outlook for Iron Ore 1994 ( TD/B/CN . 1/iron ore/13 ) . Available from Unctad , Palais des Nations , CH-1211 Geneva 10 .