Maclean Hunter , the Canadian publishing and broadcast group , yesterday rejected a CDollars 2.8bn ( USDollars 2.1bn ) takeover bid by Rogers Communications . It described the bid as inadequate and an attempt to circumvent a shareholder rights plan . Instead , MH vowed to pursue 'all reasonable alternatives to maximise shareholder value ' . Whether Rogers succeeds or fails , it seems likely to precipitate a heavy restructuring of the 108-year-old Toronto-based company . Should Rogers prevail , Mr Ted Rogers , chief executive and controlling shareholder , has outlined plans to spin off MH 's publishing interests into its newspaper subsidiary , Toronto Sun Publishing . The alternatives being considered by MH also entail significant changes . They include a recapitalisation designed to put cash into shareholders' pockets . Mr Robert Furse , chief financial officer , said yesterday this might take the form of a special dividend or a share buyback . Other options include selling or spinning off all or part of its Canadian cable-TV operations , and alliances with third parties . MH has already put its US cable-TV franchises in Michigan , New Jersey and Florida up for sale . These businesses contributed 70 per cent of its 1993 earnings . Rogers , whose interests centre on cable-TV and telecommunications , has offered CDollars 17 per MH share plus 'participation rights ' in proceeds from MH 's US cable business , provided these assets realise more than CDollars 1.5bn after expenses . MH said yesterday the terms of these participation rights did not give Rogers ' a significant incentive to maximise the sale proceeds for the benefit of MH shareholders ' . MH also said money from the sale could be paid out directly to its shareholders in a more tax-efficient way . MH reiterated that its shareholder rights plan , set up five years ago , was not designed to prevent a takeover . However , it said Rogers ' offer 'attempts to coerce the shareholders and board of MH to take the very action which the ( plan ) was intended to prevent -that is , accepting an inadequate bid in a short period of time and without the ability to seek other alternatives over a reasonable time frame ' . Rogers has yet to respond . Mr Rogers insisted last week the company would not raise its offer .