Burma 's military junta yesterday brushed off international appeals for the release of opposition leader Ms Aung San Suu Kyi and threatened to keep her under house arrest until 1995 . 'She has been told that her house arrest will extend to next year , ' Col Kyaw Win , a senior intelligence officer in the State Law and Order Restoration Council ( Slorc ) , told Japanese journalists in Rangoon . His statement came a day after Ms Suu Kyi was visited at her Rangoon home by US congressman Mr William Richardson , together with a New York Times reporter and a UN official - the first visit by people other than her family since she was held nearly five years ago . The Oxford-educated Ms Suu Kyi , who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1991 , has refused to leave the country in exchange for her release . 'Whatever they do to me , I can take it , ' she told the New York Times . She said the junta 'had tried to pressure me to leave in ways no self-respecting government should try . ' The international standing of Ms Suu Kyi , her popularity within Burma and her continued defiance are an embarrassment to the junta . Most other democracy campaigners have been killed , jailed , driven out of the country or browbeaten into submission . Ms Suu Kyi is a beacon of hope for pro-democracy activists as they watch the junta engineer a new constitution that would allow the armed forces to continue running the country from behind the scenes . The armed forces have held power since 1962 . They crushed a popular uprising in 1988 and allowed an election two years later which - to their discomfit - was won convincingly by Ms Suu Kyi 's National League for Democracy . The junta ignored the result and suppressed all forms of dissent , but is now trying to convince Japan and other countries to renew aid . Col Kyaw Win said yesterday Ms Suu Kyi would 'interfere with politics and create unrest ' if she were set free within Burma . Ms Suu Kyi has challenged the junta to respect the results of the election .