Even for governments that profess to despise 'western ' ideas about human rights , the timing is a little embarrassing . Today Ms Aung San Suu Kyi , the Burmese pro-democracy leader and Nobel peace prize winner , marks the beginning of her sixth year under house arrest in Rangoon . Burma 's military junta is being condemned throughout the world for continuing to detain her without trial . Yet this week representatives of this same military junta will be welcomed by south-east Asian foreign ministers to the opening of their annual meeting in Bangkok . The six members of the Association of South-East Asian Nations ( Asean ) - Brunei , Indonesia , Malaysia , the Philippines , Singapore and Thailand - are prepared to endure criticism from the west , from Burmese democrats and from their own human rights activists about their links to the junta partly because they have a stake in the Burmese economy . Led by Singapore , which sells weapons to the Burmese army , a growing number of Asian companies are investing and trading in Burma as the generals in charge slowly liberalise the economy ; tourist hotels and logging are two of the most popular sectors . Asian governments are also declaring with increasing confidence that 'western ' concepts of individual human rights are inappropriate for Asia , where individuals are supposedly ready to sacrifice their personal desires for economic development and the good of society as a whole . The governments of Thailand and the Philippines - hitherto the two most democratic and liberal members of Asean - are the latest adherents to this Asian world view . In an attempt to stop a human rights conference arranged by Thai non-governmental organisations to coincide with the Asean meeting , the Thai authorities last week ordered Chulalongkorn University not to host the conference and banned foreign delegates from attending . The motive was to save the Indonesian government from embarrassment . East Timor , invaded by Indonesia in 1975 and annexed after thousands of people had been killed is one of the topics on the agenda . In May , the Philippine government announced restrictions on an East Timor conference after Indonesia threatened to suspend talks on promoting regional trade and investment that would have helped the southern Philippines . Foreigners - including Mrs Danielle Mitterrand , wife of the French president -were forbidden to attend . But Asean 's efforts to stifle public debate on human rights abuses in the region appear to have backfired . In Manila and Bangkok , the clumsy attempts to prevent discussion led to fierce criticism of the authorities and much more extensive media coverage of the issues than would otherwise have been the case . The Manila conference was held anyway and Thai human rights groups vow to go ahead with theirs . The human rights debate is particularly awkward for the Thai government of Mr Chuan Leekpai , the prime minister , because he and his Democrat party were voted into office in 1992 with the support of pro-democracy demonstrators who had toppled a military government earlier in the year - about 50 people were shot dead by troops in Bangkok . Thailand has justified its decision to invite Burma to this week 's Asean meeting by pointing to Asean 's policy of 'constructive engagement ' with Rangoon . Mr Prasong Soonsiri , Thai foreign minister , said Asean wanted to integrate Burma into the world community 'so it takes measures to improve its political , economic and social situation , which will be beneficial to the Burmese under a democratic system . ' Mr Prasong 's support for democracy in Burma broke new ground and suggests the purported ideological rift between east and west on human rights is not as clear cut as some Asian leaders claim . 'Constructive engagement ' was a phrase used in the past by the conservative governments of the US and UK to describe their relationship with the apartheid regime in South Africa . Just as many opponents of apartheid in the west and in Asia criticised the policy then , so many opponents of the Burmese junta in Asia and the west criticise it today .