The decision by Japan 's Mitsubishi Motors to buy steel sheet from Korea's Pohang Iron and Steel on a long-term basis marks a turning point in the countries ' post-war industrial relations . From the Japanese perspective , last week 's contract signals a growing willingness to set aside national prejudices and to recognise its neighbour 's industrial competitiveness . For the Korean steel industry , it offers a sweet victory over its most formidable rivals and a strong vote of confidence from the Japanese motor industry . Japanese and Korean business relations have long been clouded by intense rivalry , mutual suspicion and a bitter antagonism that can be traced back centuries . But changes in the quality of Korean products and the yen's appreciation , forcing Japanese companies to diversify their sources , have prompted rivals to become partners . The older generation of businessmen on both sides of the Sea of Japan often find it difficult to overcome their deeply ingrained prejudices about the other . 'Generally , Japanese tend to look down on Koreans , ' concedes one Japanese businessman who works for a major manufacturer . 'Our chairman used to say there are countries that are likeable and those that are not , ' he says . 'It 's a very complex and tangled relationship , ' observes a foreign businessman who works in a leading Japanese electronics company . 'The general feeling among Japanese businessmen is that you ca n't work with the Koreans . ' The Japanese are aware of the bitterness Koreans still feel about the sufferings inflicted by Japanese soldiers during the second world war . Korean hostility towards Japanese businesses in the 1960s and 1970s has also left a scar on Japan 's corporate memory . Cultural differences also play a part . Japanese social etiquette does not sit easily with the straightforward approach of many Koreans , which many Japanese consider unduly aggressive . But the Japanese are also aware that the Koreans are similar in their work ethic , in their ability to work effectively in groups and their loyalty . The combination of such strong differences and similarities , and a deep familiarity with each other 's strengths and weaknesses , has added to the complex feelings between the neighbours . 'The Koreans know the Japanese very , very well and know what irks them , and that is one of the reasons the Japanese tend to be wary of doing business with them , ' said one foreign businessman in Tokyo . That fear is supported by the Japanese recognition of the potential threat Korean industry poses to Japanese industry . Korea has maintained a constant trade deficit with Japan since diplomatic relations were established in 1965 and the gap is expected to grow to almost Dollars 12bn ( Pounds 7.3bn ) this year . This reflects Korea 's heavy dependence on Japanese capital goods , including machinery and components . Korea has tried to reduce the deficit by improving its domestic subcontracting network , and increasing spending on product research and development . Seoul has also lobbied Japan to open its markets to Korean imports and encourage Japanese component manufacturers to establish production facilities in Korea . But efforts to attract new investment have met with little success so far . Japanese companies are afraid that increased industrial investments will strengthen Korea 's competitiveness . On the other hand , Korean fears about Japanese economic dominance were reflected in the recent controversy over Samsung 's entry into the car industry with the technical help of Nissan of Japan . Critics of the deal said Samsung 's co-operation with Nissan would increase car imports from Japan and hinder efforts to promote technological independence in the Korean car industry , which has been dependent on Japanese technology . Samsung won government approval for the project only after it promised to increase the local content of its cars from between 70 and 80 per cent in 1998 , when manufacturing begins , to 98 per cent by 2003 . Korea banned imports of most Japanese consumer products in the 1970s . Seoul has agreed to halve by 1997 the number of Japanese products on the 'import diversification ' list which now excludes 250 items . Executives from the Korean electronics and car industries acknowledge that the quality and technology of their products often lag behind that of their Japanese rivals although the gap is narrowing in some fields . In semiconductors , Korea has overtaken Japan as the leading maker of current generation 4-megabit dynamic random access memory chips . Japanese officials are quick to point out that these chips make up only a small part of the semiconductor market and that Japanese makers are three to five years ahead in advanced semiconductor technologies . Nevertheless , 'there is a feeling that the Koreans are doing very well in D-Rams and that they are very aggressive and formidable competitors , ' says an official at a leading Japanese semiconductor maker . The yen 's sharp appreciation and the structural changes facing Japanese industry are providing strong incentives for Japanese companies to overcome their reluctance to rely on Korea . Electronics companies , for example , are also beginning to recognise that teaming up with Korean competitors can help them succeed . NEC has agreed to share information with Samsung on developments each makes on future generation D-Rams . The change in generations is also playing a part , as younger Japanese and Koreans with few memories of the war and similar western views , rise to managerial positions . As one mid-level Japanese businessman at a leading company says : 'If there is a good partner , Korean or otherwise , we would not miss an opportunity to do business with them . '