The last of the dinosaurs grazed on a primeval grass which has since evolved over 65m years into thousands of different species , including the cereal crops which together account for more than half the food eaten by mankind . Today , the different cereals vary enormously in their overall genetic characteristics . At one extreme is wheat , with a vast amount of genetic material - six times more DNA than a human being - divided between 21 giant chromosomes . At the other is rice , which has 12 tiny chromosomes and only three per cent as much DNA as wheat . In between lie maize , sorghum and millet . Research over the past two years has shown , however , that the genes themselves are remarkably similar in wheat , rice and all other cereals - and they are arranged in exactly the same sequence in each species . In wheat ( and barley and rye ) the genes are interspersed with long repetitive stretches of 'junk DNA ' , whereas in rice there is little of this apparently superfluous DNA which does not control the plant 's growth and development . This surprising discovery , by Mike Gale , Graham Moore and colleagues at Britain 's John Innes Centre in Norwich , working with the Japanese Rice Genome Research Programme , has huge implications for cereal breeding . It means that breeders , who have traditionally studied each species separately , can pool information and quickly come up with a common genetic map that applies to all grasses and cereals . Once genes for important characteristics - for example those conferring resistance to heat or cold , disease or drought - are identified in one cereal , they can be inserted into another , using the rapidly developing technology of genetic engineering . Rice will become the main focus of genetic research in cereals , because its genome is so much smaller and therefore easier to manipulate than the other species . ( Genome is a useful technical term , meaning all the genetic material in a species , including the functioning genes , control regions that switch them on and off , and all the junk DNA in between . ) Rice can be used as a general tool to isolate genes from any cereal crop . 'We will be using rice as a bridge for research on wheat , ' says Dick Flavell , director of the John Innes Centre . 'If I had stood up a few years ago as head of a British research institute and said we needed to invest in rice research , people would have thought I was bonkers . But we do need to . ' The latest developments are good news for Japan , which had already decided to focus its agricultural genetics research on rice . The government-funded Rice Genome Research Programme , is now half way through the task of discovering the precise chemical sequence of the estimated 30,000 rice genes . Fortunately for the rest of the world , the Japanese seem to be publishing their results quickly and openly , rather than restricting access or patenting them . At the same time , plant scientists worldwide are making rapid progress in developing the genetic engineering technology that will be required to make practical use of the newly discovered genes . The 1980s was a frustrating decade because the technique used to transfer genes to other plants - infecting them with bacteria which carried in the new DNA - did not work in cereals . But it has turned out during the 1990s that a brutally direct way of inserting genes - coating thousands of microscopic gold balls with DNA and firing them into plant cells - is highly effective . And earlier this year Zeneca , the British bioscience and seeds company , announced success with an extraordinarily simple method : the researcher shakes a test-tube full of water , plant cells , DNA and tiny crystals of a common chemical called silicon carbide . The crystals ( known as whiskers ) punch holes in the cells through which foreign DNA can enter . The first field trials of genetically engineered wheat , maize and other cereals are getting under way . Easily traced 'marker genes ' have been added to these plants ; they do not confer commercially valuable characteristics but are used for scientific analysis . In Cambridgeshire , for example , Ciba Seeds is growing two types of wheat this summer : one has a red pigment gene taken from wild Peruvian maize and the other produces a bacterial enzyme that can be detected in simple tests . In the laboratory , meanwhile , researchers are beginning experiments to transfer genes that would be industrially useful . The Institute of Arable Crops Research in the UK has a project , for instance , to give wheat more genes for gluten proteins , to enhance its bread-making properties . Another early target might be the genes that control the movement of nitrate across cell membranes . Their enhancement could help wheat to use nutrients more efficiently . If so , farmers could cut the amount of nitrate fertilisers spread on their fields . In the longer run , there is potentially huge scope for genetic engineering of all cereals to make them more resistant to attack by pests and diseases and to withstand adverse weather . But as Paul Lazzeri of the IACR's Rothamsted Experimental Station points out : 'In parallel with the research , we have to resolve the question of the public acceptance of genetic engineering of food . ' Scientists believe that the world will have to accept genetically engineered cereals . On current projections , twice as much wheat and rice will have to be produced during the next 50 years as in the past 10,000 . Although improved agronomy can make a contribution , the only real hope for feeding the growing human population without catastrophic environmental damage lies in applying cereal genetics .