Advertising expenditure in European Union countries fell by about 1 per cent in real terms in 1993 - the first time a fall has been recorded in recent years , according to provisional figures from the UK 's Advertising Association and the European Advertising Tripartite * . However , the outlook for 1994 , within the EU and for a number of other countries monitored by the organisations , looks promising , with a return to real , although modest , growth of about 1 per cent for this year . Finland , Spain and Sweden 's markets suffered most last year : economic difficulties had a direct impact on advertising budgets and cutbacks in spending of more than 4 per cent were recorded . Belgium , Denmark , France , Germany and Japan 's advertising spend also fell . Modest increases in overall spending were seen in the US , UK , Ireland , Italy , the Netherlands , Norway and Switzerland , while exceptional growth was recorded in Greece ( 12.8 per cent ) and Portugal ( 8 per cent ) . According to the Advertising Association and the European Advertising Tripartite , 'the growth of advertising expenditure in these countries has been dramatic , despite the recession , because of an increase in the availability of media vehicles , greater media competitiveness and the strong performance of the broadcast media , especially television ' . Indeed , in all countries monitored , apart from Austria and Belgium , the growth in spending on television advertising outstripped print . Television overtook newspapers to become the single biggest display medium in the EU in 1992 ; by last year it became the biggest display medium in the whole of Europe . Double-digit growth rates for TV were seen in Greece , Portugal , Norway and Sweden . This trend looks set to continue : further European deregulation could eventually lead to an almost doubling of the current annual Ecu 15bn ( Pounds 11.8bn ) spending on TV advertising . The outlook for 1994 is encouraging , say the two bodies . On the back of the apparent return of confidence and positive economic indicators they are forecasting real growth in advertising expenditure almost everywhere . 'The exceptions are likely to be Finland , the Netherlands , Spain and Japan . However , the real falls in advertising expenditure in these countries are , in the main , likely to be marginal . ' * European Advertising and Media Forecast . Subscription inquiries to NTC Publications . Tel 0491 574671 .