
Bill Cosby was a triple winner at Sunday night's 16th annual People's Choice Awards, and comedian Roseanne Barr and actress Meryl Streep walked off with two awards each. 
"The Cosby Show" was named favorite television comedy series for the sixth time, and Cosby, a perennial winner, was named favorite male TV performer and all-around male entertainer. 
Barr, Cosby's chief rival for the top of the weekly TV ratings, was named favorite female TV performer and favorite all-around female entertainer. 
Backstage, Barr took the opportunity to deny reports that she wants out of the ABC series. "That was a joke," she said. 
Streep was the only other double winner, named favorite U.S. movie actress and favorite movie actress in 15 nations which are also surveyed for favorite movie, and movie actor and actress. 
"Batman" -- which set summer box office records -- was named favorite overall movie and co-favorite dramatic motion picture with "Steel Magnolias." 
Dustin Hoffman was named world favorite movie actor and Tom Cruise, an Academy Award nominee for his starring role in "Born on the Fourth of July," was named favorite movie actor. 
Asked to speculate on his Oscar chances next month, Cruise replied, "Can't I just enjoy this?" 
Arsenio Hall was named favorite late night talk show host. 
The awards are a popularity contest and are not voted on by members of the entertainment industry. The winners are chosen by an opinion poll conducted by the Gallup Organization. 
Other winners at the show, broadcast live from Universal Studios, included Neil Patrick Harris, male performer in a new television series; Jamie Lee Curtis, female performer in a new TV series; Fred Savage, young TV performer; Randy Travis and Kenny Rogers, country music performers; Bobby Brown, male musical performer, and Paula Abdul, female musical performer. 
"Rescue 911" was named favorite new TV dramatic series; "Doogie Houser M.D." the favorite new comedy series and "Look Who's Talking" won for favorite comedy motion picture. "L.A. Law" was named favorite dramatic series for the fourth time. 