
"A plastic foam beverage container to keep a cup of coffee warm five minutes is likely to last millennia. Increasingly we see polystyrene foam littering roadsides and shorelines and crowding our landfills. This stuff is cheap; it's light; it's forever." 
The author of this statement, Portland Commissioner Earl Blumenauer, is hardly alone in taking up the fight against disposal of nondegradable plastics into municipal landfills. From Long Island to Los Angeles, local officials have made plastics control a top item on their agendas. 
New York's Suffolk County, an anti-foam trailblazer, began in 1987 with a ban aimed at such dump-fillers as "clam shells," those styrofoam packages restaurants use to serve hamburgers, chicken and other fast foods. The ban was extended to any packaging that's not biodegradable. The plastics industry saw red, and a lawsuit has put off implementation. 
But reality is setting in: Suffolk must soon close several of its landfills. Says county legislator Steven Englebright: "The widespread use of plastics poses a threat tothe environment by causing rapid excess filling of landfill space, and, if we end up incinerating it, by the possible introduction of toxic by-products into the atmosphere." 
Without restraint on our part, the archaeologists of the 25th Century may find billions of tons of plastic wrappers, plates, cups, bottles, forks and disposable diapers -- all in mint condition. 
By weight, plastics represent just 7% of the 450,000 tons of waste generated in America each 24 hours. But measured by volume, they're a more ominous problem. By various estimates, plastics take 30% to 50% of landfill space. 
In March, the Minneapolis City Council unanimously declared that by July, 1990, all food-and-beverage packaging must be "environmentally acceptable"; it must be recyclable, returnable or degradable. St. Paul enacted nearly identical legislation in March. Foam egg cartons and trays, plastic ketchup or peanut-butter jars, plastic grocery bags, cups, trays, plates -- all will be illegal, whether they're made by local or national manufacturers. 
In May, the Nebraska Legislature outlawed the sale of nonbiodegradable disposable diapers in 1993. Similar laws are being discussed in Oregon, Iowa and Washington. Environmentally acceptable parents will be those willing to revert to old-fashioned wrapping of babies' bottoms in cotton. 
There are stirrings of reform, even among plastic makers and users. McDonald's, said to throw off enough polystyrene foam waste in two weeks to fill the twin towers of New York's World Trade Center, led the fast-food industry to reject packaging made with chlorofluorocarbons. (CFCs help deplete the ozone layer that protects us from cancer-causing ultraviolet rays.) 
Last month, a consortium of big chemical and oil companies said they'd build five huge plastic recycling plants, eventually recycling 25% of the 725 million pounds of foam polystyrene manufactured yearly. The acknowledged goal is to defuse demands for polystyrene bans. 
There's also increasing talk of going to biodegradable plastics. The chemistry is simple: Add cornstarch to the resin, and bacterial action quickly breaks down plastic in a landfill. Italy, hardly an environmental leader, has decreed that all plastic packaging must be degradable by next year. American farm interests are salivating at the prospect of a vast new market for corn. Biodegradable plastics, however, mean dramatically increased cost. 
Americans are absolute plastic junkies. Our annual throwaway plastic soda, milk and water bottles would fill up a line of dump trucks reaching from New York to Cleveland, Time magazine estimates. Americans' per-capita trash output doubles that of affluent West Germany or Japan. 
But the proven dangers continue to mount. Commercial fishing fleets each year dump millions of pounds of packaging materials and vast quantitites of indestructible plastic fishing lines and nets. The victims: 1 million to 2 million seabirds and 100,000 whales and seals, killed by intestinal blockages caused by plastic bags. 
So what will induce our society to change our ways? 
One answer would be a sweeping national anti-plastics law. But waiting for the silver-bullet national solution, Earl Blumenauer argues, is simply unrealistic: 
"Congress and, increasingly, state legislatures are caught in political gridlock induced by special interests. The oil companies, the container firms hire their high-priced lobbyists. Things get studied to death or just beaten down." 
What's the alternative? Local governments engaged in grass-roots, hard-headed, educational cost-and-benefits debates about foam plastics, says Blumenauer. Thousands of local governments mean thousands of chances for action. Each local debate, grounded in the reality of overflowing waste dumps, should build a consensus on reducing waste and litter, creating state or national action. 
It's a great theory. Now all we have to do is see if it works. 