
The supply of O-positive blood is at half the minimum safety level, the San Diego Blood Bank reported Thursday. 
"Two traumatic accidents would be it for us," blood bank spokeswoman Stephani Casenza said. 
Based on daily demand, the safety level for O-positive, the most common blood type, is a minimum of 250 pints, Casenza said. 
As an example of how quickly the blood supply can be drained, Casenza cited the case of a stagehand who was critically injured when a steel beam fell on him after a rock concert in August. 
His first operation required 100 pints of blood and blood components. He died, but, during his hospitalization, he used more than 200 pints of blood and components, Casenza said. 
The blood bank supplies San Diego County's 27 non-military hospitals and Imperial County, Casenza said, adding, "We need 300 volunteers a day to keep the hospitals supplied." 
Donations fluctuate daily, but "we have less than half the safety level now for O-positive. We are experiencing a severe shortage of all blood types," she said. 
The blood bank makes an appeal to bolster supplies two to three times a year, "but during the holiday season we have a real tough time keeping the blood supplies up," Casenza said. 
Starting in November, potential donors become both busier and sick more often. At the same time, increased traffic and drinking-related accidents mean increased demand for blood, Casenza said. 
Historically, about 9% of the population in San Diego has donated all of the blood supply, she said. 
Donors can give blood at the San Diego Blood Bank's Hillcrest facility at 440 Upas St. Hours are 8:30 a.m. to 7 p.m. weekdays and 8:30 a.m. to 6 p.m. weekends. 
At the North County Donor Center, 1845 E. Valley Parkway in Escondido, hours are 11:30 a.m. to 7 p.m. weekdays and 8:30 a.m. to 4 p.m. Saturday. 
At the North Coastal Donor Center, 161 Thunder Drive, Suite 108 in Vista, hours are 11:30 a.m. to 7 p.m., Wednesday through Friday and 8:30 a.m. to 4 p.m. Tuesday and Saturday. 
For the bloodmobile schedule, call 296-6393. 