
On almost any given weekend morning, the regulars show up at a Van Nuys elementary school for a pick-up game. 
You can count on Keith Weinstein and the Grant High players to show up. And, just as regularly, Harry Marks and Robert Hill from archrival North Hollywood show up too. 
Except this past weekend. Because it wasn't just any given weekend. 
"They didn't show up this weekend," Weinstein said. 
They are the North Hollywood players. 
And the Huskies should be forgiven. They had seen enough of Weinstein raining three-point shots. They had seen enough of him stealing the ball. They had seen enough of him just plain beating them. 
So why go through it again on a day off? 
Yes, 5-foot-10 shooting guard Keith Weinstein had a day to remember last Wednesday when Grant upset North Hollywood for the second time this season. Last month, in the North Hollywood tournament, Grant beat the Huskies, 54-43. 
This time, the score was 48-46 and it sent North Hollywood to its only other loss of the season. What role did Weinstein play? 
The senior scored 25 points -- more than half of his team's total -- on nine-of-15 shooting from the field. He made five three-point shots, had four steals and handed out a couple of assists. More importantly, he proved to be the coolest of players in an important game. 
Time and again down the stretch, the Lancers looked to Weinstein. Time and again, he answered. 
"I feel like I can do it at the end," Weinstein said simply. 
With Grant leading, 35-33 and time running out in the third quarter, Weinstein scored on a buzzer-beating jump shot to make the score 37-33. 
With the score tied, 37-37, and just 6:03 left, Weinstein launched an NBA-distance three-point shot and was fouled. The shot hit only net, as did his free throw, giving Grant a 41-37 lead. 
Then, as Grant trailed, 44-43, with less than a minute remaining, Weinstein picked up a loose ball, streaked down the court, made a layup and was fouled, setting off bedlam in the gymnasium. He made the ensuing free throw and Grant led, 46-44. 
"He's our most valuable player," Grant Coach Howard Levine said. "He has been all along." 
Weinstein scored nine of the team's final 13 points. Almost more crucial to him and his mates, though, was winning a little respect. 
"Every time we play (North Hollywood) it's something special," Weinstein said. "Because last time we beat them, not many people thought that it was for real." 
They have to believe now. Weinstein followed his performance in the North Hollywood game by scoring a team-high 17 points -- in just three quarters -- on Friday during a routine win over Poly on seven-of-15 shooting. He made three three-point shots and handed out six assists. 
Weinstein has made 27 of his past 50 shots from the field -- including 11 three-point shots -- in Grant's past four games, all wins. But like a true disciple of the disciplined Levine, he switches to team-oriented discussion. 
"We have to play hard in every game or else," he said. "We try really hard. We're not at all a cocky team. We're kinda like a humble team." 
On an individual note, though, Weinstein said that he has received a few letters from Division II schools but likely will attend a junior college next fall. 