
Just when they have finally started hitting, the Dodgers placed two of their best hitters, outfielders Kal Daniels and Mickey Hatcher, on the 15-day disabled list Sunday. 
Daniels, hitting .342 since being acquired in a trade with the Cincinnati Reds July 18, is sidelined with a sore right knee. He admitted Sunday that he tried too come back to soon from May 16 arthroscopic surgery on the knee. He could be out for the remainder of the season. 
Hatcher, hitting a team-leading .322, is suffering from a strained left hamstring, which popped while he was chasing vandals near his home Friday night. He likely will return within 15 days. 
The Dodgers have recalled outfielder Mike Huff and infielder Mike Sharperson from triple-A Albuquerque. Some believe Huff could be the Dodgers eventual answer in center field. He is hitting .323 with 30 stolen bases. Sharperson, who has spent parts of the last two seasons with the Dodgers and was recalled for two games earlier this year, is hitting .311. 
"We discussed, and we decided it would be better if I just rehabilitate the knee instead of trying to play every day," Daniels said. 
Daniels' knee was examined by Dodger doctors last week and no damage was found. The knee simply hasn't recovered from earlier surgery. Daniels tried to play 35 days after surgery. 
"I came back too soon from the operation -- I would tape up my knee every night and go out there," Daniels said. "But my first day with the Dodgers, when I tried to tape it, they told me if I had to tape it, I shouldn't be playing." 
Dodger Vice President Fred Claire said: "We knew about his knee problems, but that was part of the deal. If he was hitting .330 with two good knees, they wouldn't have traded him. This was the only way we could him. We're confident that we can get him completely healthy again." 
Hatcher, who had replaced Daniels in left field, was upset about a loss of precious playing time. "To have this happen at this time, and because I was chasing kids . . . I can't believe it," Hatcher said. BILL PLASCHKE 