
Rossini is the composer dominating the new opera releases this season. It's a moot point whether we live in an era that has fostered the pinpoint vocal technique and authority necessary to plumb the treasures lying in wait amid Rossini's 38 stage works. But scholarship at last has turned its furrowed brow to an artist far too long perceived only as an engaging trickster. 
No name appears more frequently on new Rossini releases than that of the Fondazione Rossini, the Italian-based organization that is gradually publishing critical editions of all the operas. One musician who has consistently availed himself of these endeavors is Claudio Abbado. The Berlin Philharmonic's recently appointed principal conductor is both sonically and musically the center of the new recording of "L'Italiana in Algeri" (Deutsche Grammophon 427 331-2, two compact discs). 
Based on the late Jean-Pierre Ponnelle's Vienna State Opera production of the durable comedy, the project finds Abbado leading the Vienna Philharmonic in a tightly controlled, dominating reading that makes up in detailed phrasing what it lacks in sheer affability. Seemingly spun from a plot concocted while waiting for the pasta to cook, "L'Italiana" abounds in pyrotechnical displays and delectably intricate ensembles. 
Greek mezzo-soprano Agnes Baltsa musters the necessary bravura for Isabella, though she sounds a bit hard-pressed at times by Abbado's rigid tempos, a qualification that extends to the elegant Lindoro of tenor Frank Lopardo. As Mustafa, Isabella's comic nemesis, bass Ruggero Raimondi offers uncentered tone and lagging rhythmic attacks, thereby thwarting much of the humor in Rossini's vocal line. 
Based also on a live production (in Lyon, 1988) is Philips' enchanting new "Le Comte Ory" (422 406-2, two compact discs). Rossini's only French-language comedy borrows heavily from that earlier jape, "Il Viaggio a Reims," but this comparatively late work proves a sophisticated, almost Boccaccian comedy of sexual manners. 
John Eliot Gardiner, the Opera de Lyon's departing music director, has wisely enforced ensemble values over individual star turns. One notes with pleasure tenor John Aler's flexible Ory, soprano Sumi Jo's pristine Countess Adele, mezzo Diana Montague's lovestruck page, Isolier, and baritone Gino Quilico's wise tutor Raimbaud. This is the first domestically released stereo recording of "Le Comte Ory"; it should provide its own revelations. 
One conductor who would have none of critical editions was the late Giuseppe Patane, and his complacent baton sanctions most of the traditional buffo shtick and vocal assignments on the new "Barbiere di Siviglia" (London 425 520-2, three compact discs), with the Orchestra and Chorus of Bologna's Teatro Comunale. If nothing else, the recording serves as an introduction to Cecilia Bartoli, the remarkable Italian mezzo-coloratura who augurs to become the leading Rossini heroine of the decade. 
Bartoli's Rosina is aristocratic charm personified, a melding of wistfulness and calculation, and she finds apt colleagues in William Matteuzzi's elegant Almaviva, Leo Nucci's mercurial Figaro and Enrico Fissore's commanding Bartolo. Only Paata Burchuladze's ponderous Basilio lets the team down. 
Listeners desirous of skipping the preliminaries should head right for Bartoli's remarkable debut recital of eight Rossini arias (London 425 430), again with Patane, this time conducting the Arnold-Schoenberg-Chor und Konzertvereinigung Wiener Volksopernorchester. At the age of 23, Bartoli's voice is a remarkably ripe instrument, marked by a sound chest register, a secure top, no audible break in registers, flexibility in coloratura passages, a hint of covered tone and a pronounced vibrato that will recall the doyenne of Rossini specialists, the Spanish star Conchita Supervia. 
Bartoli here assays arias from "I'Italiana," "La Donna del Lago," "Tancredi," "Otello," "La Pietra del Paragone" and the finale from "La Cenerentola." The only miscalculation is the bouncy "Fac ut portem" from the "Stabat Mater," a religious masterwork which is not about bounce. 
Proof that technique and idiomatic savvy do not alone suffice for Rossini comes in often painful guise on a new "Encore" recital by Rockwell Blake (Arabesque Z6612, with the London Symphony and Ambrosian Choir conducted by Maximiano Valdes). The American tenor fearlessly confronts excerpts from "Semiramide," "Zelmira," "Ermione," "La Gazza Ladra," "Otello," "Ricciardo e Zoraide" and "Armida." Hearing him leap octaves while elucidating runs with pristine clarity fills one with admiration. 
It's much harder, however, to love Blake's ungainly attacks and bullish assaults on stratospheric passages. Technique and critical editions have their place in any Rossini revival, but sheer beauty counts too. 