
After all this time, mention of the Tate-La Bianca case evokes in untold thousands the shocking memories of two nights of horror in Los Angeles 20 years ago when Manson Family cultists savagely murdered seven people, including beautiful, honey-blonde actress Sharon Tate. 
Like the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, the bloody slayings -- examined in gruesome detail during the sensational, 9 1/2-month trial of Charles Manson and three of his "girls" -- occupy a place in the nation's consciousness, although more have died in mass murders since. 
On that first night -- warm, muggy Aug. 9, 1969 -- Manson followers Susan Atkins, 21; Patricia Krenwinkel, 21, and Charles (Tex) Watson, 23, invaded the Benedict Canyon home leased by Tate and her husband, film director Roman Polanski, and killed the 27-year-old actress, who was 8 1/2 months pregnant. 
In a frenzy of shooting and stabbing, they also murdered coffee heiress Abigail Folger, 26; her lover, Polish playboy Wojceich Frykowski, 37; hair stylist Jay Sebring, 37, and Steven Parent, 18, who had come to visit a caretaker. Polanski was out of town. 
Acting on Manson's orders again the next night, follower Leslie Van Houten, 20, joined Watson and Krenwinkel in the murder of grocery executive Leno La Bianca, 44, and his wife, Rosemary, 38, in Los Feliz, a few miles away. 
The killers stabbed the seven victims more than 200 times. They wrote "Pig" in Tate's blood and "Death to Pigs," "Rise," and "Healter Skelter" in the La Biancas' blood. "Sadie" Atkins tasted Tate's blood and said, "To taste death and yet give life, wow, what a trip." 
Even now, the brutal murders have the power to puzzle those concerned with the motive. 
Did Manson, who had spent nearly half his life in jail, really expect to fulfill his vision of Armageddon -- based on the lyrics of a Beatles song -- by starting a black-white race war, as suggested by his prosecutor, Deputy Dist. Atty. Vincent T. Bugliosi? Or was it satanism, as some have since suggested? Or, possibly Manson's own mental illness, as others have speculated? 
Those who knew him then say Manson taught that all people are God, Jesus Christ and the devil -- part of a whole -- and as such, there is no right, no wrong, no good or bad, no barrier to action, and that death, time and pain are only concepts. 
His followers -- mostly young women -- described life as a daily "magical mystery tour," without guilt or shame. But, according to others, life at the make-believe world of Spahn Movie Ranch in the Santa Susana Pass, where the Manson Family settled in late 1968, wasn't all that magical. 
They lived on discarded food collected from supermarket dumpsters. Manson handed out LSD, directed group sex and sent his followers to steal, later to kill. 
Some have seen the murders, coming at the end of the tumultuous 1960s, as the culmination of a decade of assassinations, black ghetto riots, war in Vietnam, campus protests, seemingly universal challenge of the Establishment in the hippie era and general loosening of social restraints. 
To retired Superior Court Judge Charles H. Older, 71, who presided at the trial, Manson's "twisted philosophy" supplied direction to people without it. "That's what made the murders possible: 'There is no wrong, and whatever we do is right,' " Older said recently. 
Manson and his co-defendants were all sentenced to death, but were spared when the state Supreme Court overturned capital punishment, which has since been reinstated. 
Manson, now 54, and the others have repeatedly sought parole from their life prison sentences without success. Whenever they seek freedom, Deputy Dist. Atty. Stephen R. Kay, 45, who helped convict them, steadfastly opposes their release because he thinks they are "very dangerous." 
So far, Kay has appeared at 38 parole hearings, reminding members of the state Board of Prison Terms, in graphic detail, of the seven murders that shocked the nation two decades ago. 
"They are in prison for committing horrible murders to start a race war and destroy our society," Kay said this week. "I don't think they should be given another chance to destroy society." 