
George Raveling, USC basketball coach, used new tactics to prepare the Trojans for today's game against Washington State. 
Rebounding drills? 
No. 
Free throw drills? 
No. 
Would you believe wheelbarrow racing? 
In a scene that could have been from a company picnic, the Trojans were divided into two squads for wheelbarrow and piggyback races at the start of Friday's practice. The losers had to do 25 push-ups. 
Although it looked bizarre, there was a method to Raveling's apparent madness. He was trying to ease the tension that has mounted during USC's 7-game losing streak. 
"You need to loosen them up a little bit and let them know it's still fun," Raveling said. "I'm trying to get them in the right mind set. They're still a little shell-shocked." 
When the fun ended, the Trojans got down to business, working on more conventional basketball skills. 
USC's players appreciated the deviation from their normal routine. 
"It broke up the monotony of coming out and doing the same drills every day," said guard Rich Grande. "Everyone knows that we're losing but I don't think anyone has given up." 
USC is 7-11 overall, 0-7 in the Pac-10 and has lost 7 straight games. Washington State is 6-11 and 1-7 and has lost its last 6. Kelvin Sampson, Washington State's coach, has called today's game a battle for the Pac-10 cellar. 
It's an accurate description. USC is 10th in the Pacific-10 and Washington State is ninth. After building a 13-point lead in Thursday night's game against UCLA, Washington State lost, 64-63, on Trevor Wilson's last-second tip-in. 
Wilson followed his own missed shot, going around Brian Quinnett for the rebound, which led to the game-winning shot. 
Quinnett, a 6-foot 9-inch forward, is Washington State's top player. After sitting out last season with a broken foot, he is averaging 18 points and 6 rebounds. 
Trojan Notes 
Today's game is a homecoming for George Raveling, who coached at Washington State for 11 years. . . . Center Chris Munk has been playing well in the last 4 games, averaging 11 points and 9 rebounds in that span, compared to his season averages of 7.0 and 6.5. 