
Whenever Michael Jackson is honored, it's news. Heck, whenever he leaves the house, it's news. And the promise of seeing the entertainer collect yet another award was enough to get almost every photographer and camera crew in Hollywood to the Regent Beverly Wilshire Tuesdayafternoon, when Jackson was honored at a lunch thrown by the music publishing organization BMI. 
The new BMI Michael Jackson Award, based on his humanitarian as well as show business efforts, was presented by BMI president/CEO Frances Preston at a pre-lunch press conference. 
Feeling talkative, the soft-spoken, sunglasses-wearing Jackson commented: "Thank you very much Frances," before being escorted from the stage. 
(The normally bold press corps was respectfully quiet during his exit. Apparently you can scream questions at the President, but not at Michael Jackson.) 
Then it was downstairs for lunch and conversation with guests like Elton John, who sympathized with Jackson: "A lot of rubbish has been written about him, as it has about all of us. Including me." 
Also there: the star's parents, Joe and Katherine, and brother Jackie, as well as Brian Wilson, Gladys Knight, Petula Clark, Milton Berle, MC Hammer, Vanessa Williams, Melissa Manchester, Micky Dolenz of the Monkees, Berry Gordy, Juliet Mills and Maxwell Caulfield, Stephen Bishop, Jelly Bean Benitez, Allee Willis and Barbara Orbison. The inimitable Little Richard made one of his not-so-little entrances midway through the program. And Michael, apparently more at ease, removed his sunglasses during the meal. 
Lunch was basically an extended photo opportunity interrupted by salmon and Caesar salad, but it all became worthwhile over coffee, when BMI showed a compilation tape of the star's career, put together by Jackson himself. 
The 10-minute documentary chronicled his life from the Jackson 5 through his zillion-selling solo albums, with lots of shots of hyperventilating teen-age girls and congratulations from Elizabeth Taylor and Katharine Hepburn. 
And who might be the second recipient of the Michael Jackson Award? 
"Oh, I haven't even begun to think about that," said BMI president Preston. 
Well, here's an idea. How about sister Janet? 