
It was an environmental dream come true. The Exxon oil company announced it had completed its Alaska oil spill cleanup to everyone's satisfaction and by September would close up shop. 
The man responsible for the Exxon success was Joe Sludge, who has personally shined 90% of all the rocks in Valdez. Joe was in Washington to testify in front of a congressional committee, and I found him sitting by the reflecting pool, cleaning oil sludge from between his toes. 
"No one thought you could do it," I said. 
Joe replied, "I couldn't have done it without the help of the captain of the Valdez and his merry crew, as well as my superiors in the home office. A company like Exxon doesn't operate in a vacuum." 
"Are you permitted to tell me how you won the environmental battle?" 
"We just took a page out of Vietnam. We fought the good fight and then we said, 'The hell with it -- we'll finish up next spring.' " 
"How many rocks did Exxon polish up after the spill?" 
"A lot more than anyone can imagine. But it isn't just cleaning them that we should get credit for. There are rocks in Valdez you can eat a smoked salmon off of -- that is, if you can find a salmon in Valdez. But the main point is that Exxon gave it its best shot and now it's Mother Nature's turn to do some of the dirty work." 
"Joe, everyone knows you have been diligent in saving the shoreline of Alaska, but you have to admit there wouldn't have been a spill if it hadn't been for Exxon. Shouldn't a neutral party decide when it's time to hang up the towel?" 
"The only ones to judge such an important matter are the stockholders. After all, the cost of the cleanup is coming out of their pockets. Most of our stockholders care more about the environment than Exxon critics." 
"Why is that?" 
"Because they have a vested interest in how much Exxon spends to clean up its mess. Unlike environmentalists, stockholders don't let sentiment interfere in tough crude-oil decisions. Exxon management could waffle at any time, but the pragmatic stockholder never will." 
"I can see that the stockholders are less sentimental about Alaska's environment, but doesn't a non-negotiable pullout jeopardize the good name of Exxon?" 
"No, because the American people are fair. They know good spills from bad spills. Valdez could have been a disaster if we hadn't cleaned up the rocks. The Alaskan shoreline is far more spic and span now than it was before the spill. If Exxon hadn't had such a top-flight training program, the brave captain of Valdez might have beached his ship in San Francisco harbor." 
"Or perhaps in one of the Great Lakes," I added. 
Joe said, "If you want the truth, the reason Exxon is signing off is that we're sick and tired of doing everybody else's laundry. Do you know that I have personally cleaned rocks along the shore, and I am certain that the oil on them did not come from our ship?" 
"If you were so sure, why didn't you just throw those rocks back in the sea?" I asked. 
"Because Exxon doesn't operate that way. When it comes to oil spills, our policy has always been to clean every stone -- with no questions asked. That's why we're known in the oil business as Mr. Clean of the Sea." 