
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney's preferred candidate for Air Force chief of staff, Gen. Merrill A. McPeak, was a finalist when the post became available earlier this summer but lost out in part because Gen. Michael J. Dugan was judged better able to "tell the Air Force story," a senior Air Force officer said Tuesday. 
Given Dugan's firing Monday for indiscretions in an interview with The Times and the Washington Post, it would seem that the less loquacious McPeak is the right man at the right time. 
With discretion and tact now the watchwords, associates of McPeak who were contacted for remarks about the man and his record refused public comment. Still, Pentagon spokesman Pete Williams said, subordinates should not fear talking with reporters -- a point he said he had made to commanders and other Pentagon officials. 
"It would be a thorough misreading and a total misunderstanding if anyone were to conclude that we're trying to discourage people from talking to the press," Williams said. "We encourage our military commanders to be open and accessible." 
Air Force leaders may be betting that the 54-year-old McPeak's career record will speak for itself. In his 33 years with the Air Force, McPeak has received 16 medals and awards, including the Distinguished Service Medal for exceptionally meritorious service and the Silver Star for gallantry in combat. 
A Vietnam veteran and former Thunderbird pilot, McPeak's present responsibility as commander in chief of the Pacific Air Forces at Hickam Air Force Base in Hawaii includes the command of more than 60,000 people serving in U.S. air operations from Japan to the United States. 
McPeak, who has more than 5,000 flying hours, was the lead flier for the Thunderbirds, or U.S. Air Force Demonstration Squadron, in more than 200 air shows. 
After his stunt flying, McPeak reported to Vietnam, where he flew 269 combat missions and earned several medals for gallantry and service during his nine months there. He then received his master's degree in international relations from George Washington University and attended the National War College in 1974. 
He was assigned to command U.S. air bases in England and Spain for one year each and was eventually promoted to chief of staff of U.S. air forces in Europe in 1981. Returning to the United States in 1982, McPeak served at Langley Air Force Base in Virginia, at Air Force headquarters in Washington and as commander of the 12th Air Force at Bergstrom Air Force Base in Texas. 
His promotions came quickly after 1981, when he rose to brigadier general. In July, 1988, he was promoted to full general. 
A health and fitness buff, McPeak is married and has two sons. 
Williams declined to say how soon President Bush is expected to act on Cheney's recommendation. 
As for Dugan, he will receive a full pension, which for an officer with his rank and seniority totals about $60,000 annually, officials said. 