
DEAR MISS MANNERS 
In our dinner-dance club, there is a nice attorney in his 50s who insists on dancing with a toothpick protruding from his mouth. 
I have been afraid he would put out some woman's eye if he were accidentally bumped, as one often is on a crowded dance floor. Please, repeat your "toothpick manners." 
GENTLE READER -- It is wrong to put out a lady's eye with a toothpick on the dance floor. Is that the rule you mean? 
Or do you want to know how to tell him to take that stupid thing out of his mouth? 
Miss Manners suggests that anybody whose business this is, which is to say any lady contemplating dancing with him, tell him that, to avoid just the sort of danger you describe, she will wait until he is finished picking his teeth. 
You and Miss Manners know that it isn't chiefly the danger that is offensive; it is the vulgarity. We cannot politely tell people to stop being vulgar, but we can sometimes delicately warn people of danger; thus, your excuse will do very well. 
DEAR MISS MANNERS -- My aunt does everything by the book: Invitations go out on time, thank-yous arrive promptly; she is the picture of social grace. However, by the third drink, she will invariably (in front of all the guests) turn to my husband and ask, "Just what kind of money do you make?" 
We are so stunned by this highly personal question that we are at a loss for words. How would you handle this? 
GENTLE READER -- Like a joke. 
Miss Manners is aware that it is not a scream to be embarrassed by a tediously tipsy relative, but cannot allow you to be rude to this lady, who seems to have lost her place in that book you say she does everything by. Something along the lines of "Oh, the same kind as everyone else" or "We're doing just fine, auntie, how are you?" should do if it is rapidly followed by a new topic of conversation. 
DEAR MISS MANNERS -- I am a single woman who often travels alone for business and pleasure. I am stumped for a ladylike occupation to fill in the time between ordering a meal and its arrival. I have experimented with writing personal letters at the table. Will this behavior put me entirely beyond the pale, even if I use black ink and white paper? 
GENTLE READER -- Miss Manners is afraid that it will. For a solitary diner, reading is permissible behavior; writing is not. Do not attempt to find any logic in this distinction, because there isn't any. 
DEAR MISS MANNERS -- Two years ago, when I had my bat mitzvah, I received in the mail a gift from a teacher I hadn't seen for years. About eight months later, I discovered that I'd never sent this person a thank-you note. I was so embarrassed by the lateness that I just decided to ignore the situation. This is still bothering me. What can I do? 
GENTLE READER -- Ignoring the transgression didn't help, did it? What is more, it never will. Miss Manners promises that you will never emerge from etiquette purgatory until you write that letter. 
At this point, it should contain not only a long story about how much the present has meant to you and how often it makes you think of the teacher, but a lot of groveling about how awful you felt when you discovered that you had neglected to let the teacher know how grateful you were. (Note the phrasing: not how awful you feel about not having written a thank-you letter -- that makes it sound like a chore.) 