
Question: Are you aware of any information on or publications about the Steele or Steel surname? 
Answer: Steel/Steele is an interesting old English surname, but authorities disagree as to its origins. For information about the Steel(e) Family News, write to the publication at 813 Forest Ave., Plymouth, Mich. 48170. 
Some name experts say Steel/Steele is a locality name -- meaning one who came from Steel, a stile or place where one has to climb. The northern English pronunciation makes stile sound like "steel," and it is the name of places in Northumberland and Shropshire. 
Others claim it is a baptism name, meaning "the son of Steel," from the old Danish "Staal," or derived from an occupational name for a steelworker. Its origins may have come from the Old English, a metonym (nickname) meaning firmness and reliability. The surname is found as early as 1273 in English records where it was spelled Stele. 
Q: What does the German name Klatte mean and could you recommend a book on this subject? 
A: Klatte or Klatt means "one with tangled or disheveled hair." Sources are "New Dictionary of American Family Names" by Elsdon C. Smith (try your local library for this reference) and Hans Bahlow's "Deutsches Namenlexikon" (in German). 
Q: I would like to know where the name Alston originated. I think it is English, as my father was born in Australia around 1900. 
A: Alston is an English locality name meaning one who came from Alston (the village of one whose name began with Al -- the name of several places in England) and dates back as early as 1273 in English records. It also is what is known as a font name (based on the father's name) meaning "noble," and in Old English was from Athel -- elf/old/temple stone. 
Q: Can you tell me anything about the surname Noble? What is its nationality? 
A: Noble is of English origins, primarily -- meaning an illustrious or famous person; one possessing dignity; of high birth or exalted rank. However, it was a name sometimes given ironically -- in other words, a nickname. However, there was a le Noble family of Normandy dating back to as early as the 12th Century. 
Q: Could you tell me something about the names Duke and Dunn? I believe both are Irish. I know nothing about this type of research. 
A: Duke is an English name meaning descendant of Duke -- a pet (nickname) form of Marmaduke (sea leader; steward) -- and was spelled le Duc in early English records. Dunn (also spelled Dunne, and in Ireland O'Duinn or O'Doinn) is Irish, meaning the dark-brown-complexioned one or grandson of Donn (brown). O'Dunne (or O'Doyne) is one of the most numerous of surnames in the midland counties of Ireland. 
To learn about the origins and meanings of your family names check at your local library for dictionaries on the subject -- one of the best is New Dictionary of American Family Names by Elsdon C. Smith. 
For information about family associations, societies, reunions and publications, consult the comprehensive listing published by Summit Publications, P.O. Box 222, Munroe Falls, Ohio 44262, entitled "Family Associations, Societies and Reunions ($8 ppd.); and Directory of Family (One Name) Periodicals (1988-89 edition, $8 ppd.). Merle Ganier, 2108 Grace St., Fort Worth, Tex. 76111 publishes an annual edition ($5 ppd.) of Family Periodicals. 