
Costa Rican goalie Luis Conejo was a star in his team's World Cup victory over Scotland Monday and was nearly as good Saturday against heavily favored Brazil. 
Nearly. 
Muller, Brazil's striker, hooked in a shot that deflected off defender Mauricio Montero in the 33rd minute for a 1-0 victory over Costa Rica at Turin, Italy, that allowed the Brazilians to advance to the second round from Group C. 
Their two victories are worth four points, and they join Cameroon, Italy, Czechoslovakia and West Germany among teams that already have clinched second-round berths. 
Costa Rica has a 1-1 record for two points and remains in the running for the second round, as does Scotland, which beat Sweden, 2-1, in the other Group C game Saturday. 
Costa Rica and Sweden meet Wednesday as do Scotland and Brazil. 
The Brazilians completely dominated the first half, restricting Costa Rica to the occasional breakout. 
Midfielder Alemao set the pattern in the first minute, firing a shot just inches wide. In the second minute, Careca and Costa Rican defender Roger Gomez rose high together and the ball flew off the crossbar. 
With Branco floating dangerously on the left, the Brazilians launched wave after wave of attacks. But they were frustrated by the skills of Conejo. Dunga, Valdo, Careca and Branco all had shots that flew either narrowly off target or were saved by Conejo. 
Brazil's Ricardo Gomes hit the post with a 48th-minute header, and Valdo sent two shots screaming narrowly off target as Costa Rica remained in a defensive mode the entire game. 
Scotland 2, Sweden 1 -- Scotland made wholesale changes and used them well to win at Genoa, Italy, and keep alive their hopes of reaching the second round of the World Cup for the first time. 
Midfielder Stuart McCall scored from close range in the 11th minute and striker Mo Johnston converted a penalty kick to put the game away with eight minutes to play. 
Substitute Glenn Stroemberg scored for Sweden with four minutes left. The Swedes, who lost, 2-1, to Brazil in their opener, pressed for the tying goal and had two good chances. But goalie Jim Leighton held them off. 
"We were tired at the end," Scotland Coach Andy Roxburgh said. 
McCall's early goal followed a corner kick by Murdo MacLeod that found David McPherson, who headed it on toward McCall. He beat the Swedish defense to score. 
Scotland counterattacked well in the last 20 minutes, and Roy Aitken was brought down by Roland Nilsson in the penalty area to set up Johnston's goal. 
"We were poor in attack," Sweden Coach Olle Nordin said. 
Sweden missed its top striker, Mats Magnusson, due to injury but welcomed back its best defender, Glen Hysen. But Scotland's changes were more helpful. 
It juggled its lineup, pairing McPherson and Craig Levein on defense to give it the stability missed in the opening loss to Costa Rica. 