
Vandalism is something no one in the auto show industry likes to discuss. Most show officials claim there are no problems at their shows, but some are quick to point out problems at rival exhibits. 
The most costly vandalism usually involves slashing leather seats of luxury cars. More frequent targets are in-dash cigarette lighters and gearshift knobs. A Ford official said an entire audio system was taken from a car once. Enterprising thieves also have made off with car batteries and engine parts, which is one reason the manufacturers keep the hoods locked. 
In Chicago a few years ago, a man climbed into a Lincoln Continental, locked the doors and began shouting, "It's mine." It took three hours to find a locksmith to open the vehicle. 
The Los Angeles auto show is hoping to attract new attention this year by showcasing winners of the National Automobile Model Design contest, billed as the nation's largest gathering of futuristic automotive styling. About 30 of the winning scale models are on display in the convention center lobby. 
Los Angeles lost one claim to fame to Detroit this year. Traditionally, Motor Trend magazine has announced its domestic car of the year in Los Angeles during the show. This year, however, the winner of the award was unveiled at a luncheon on Thursday in Detroit in conjunction with the show there. 
"It's kind of a coup for Detroit and increases the prestige of the Detroit show to have the announcement there," said Jack R. Nerad, executive editor of the Los Angeles-based magazine. 
Show revenue comes from ticket sales and space rentals. Ticket prices range from $7 in some East Coast cities to as little as $1 at some small regional shows. They average $4 or $5; the Los Angeles show is $4 for adults and children under 12 are free. 
Car manufacturers rent exhibit space, and prices vary widely, even among the big shows. Exhibitors at the Detroit show this week are paying $2.50 a square foot, while those at the Los Angeles show pay $4 and Chicago will charge $5 in February. 