
No doubt about it: Consumers have more low-fat, low-calorie food choices then ever before, backed by more product information than ever before. The problem is that to use all this labeling and terminology you need to come to the supermarket equipped with a small encyclopedia of knowledge. 
Labeling terms aren't always crystal-clear. Regulations may differ depending on whether a food comes under the jurisdiction of the U.S. Department of Agriculture or the Food and Drug Administration. Some foods designed for the health-conscious may not be that healthful at all. If you haven't done your homework, it may be hard to find the meaning behind the message. 
Several critical signposts can guide your quest to cut calories and fat. Take beef. Here, the key is to look for the USDA Select grade and, even more important, to buy leaner cuts. For example, 3 1/2 ounces of Choice chuck blade contains about 16 grams of fat, compared to 14 grams in the Select grade. The same portion of Choice top round, broiled, provides 6 1/2 grams; in Select grade, just under 5 1/2 grams of fat. Tenderloin and bottom round fall in the middle, with Choice cuts containing about 10 grams of fat and the Select under 9 grams. 
Leaner Pork Available 
If you eat well-done ground beef, you'll get 19 grams of fat from regular beef, nearly 18 grams from lean, and 16 grams from extra lean. Depending on cut and grade, anywhere from 26% of the calories, as in top round, to 60% of the calories in regular ground beef, come from fat. The net result is that 3 1/2 ounces of meat can contain from 180 to 270 calories. For Prime cuts, the tally goes higher. 
Leaner pork is also available now. Again, the key is in the cut. In roast loin, 62% of calories are from fat; in rib, 52%; in tenderloin, just 26%. Calories in 3 1/2 ounces of these cuts range from a high of 280 to a low of 165. 
The deli department also offers new products. "Lite" items, some up to 95% fat-free, include corned beef, pork, beef roast, turkey breast and ham. Still others, while not quite as low in fat, may contain less fat than traditional products. But beware: Some products have more sodium than do traditional foods. Fresh meat and poultry, selected with an eye to reduced fat, thus remain your best bets. 
The meaning of the term lite, incidentally, wavers like a flag in the breeze. Under USDA rules, lite indicates fewer calories or less salt and at least 25% less fat or other ingredients than the usual product. Along with lite, the terms light, lean, leaner and lower fat can all be used on products with at least a 25% reduction in fat. Foods designated as lean or low fat must also contain less than 10% fat. Extra lean must contain no more than 5% fat. Moreover, the label must state just how much fat it contains. 
Other Rules 
If this sounds overwhelming, there is more. For raw ground beef and hamburger, there are other rules. Fat levels for regular ground beef are 30%; for lean ground beef, 22.5%; and for extra lean, 15%. 
For labeling other low-calorie foods, a completely different set of regulations, formulated by the FDA, applies. If the words low calorie, low in calories or a low-calorie food appear on the display panel, you can expect that a serving provides less than 40 calories and no more than 0.4 calories per gram as eaten (unless it's a sugar substitute). The catch is that the manufacturer defines the serving, and twice as much serving means twice as many calories. Additionally, foods like celery that are naturally low in calories may be labeled celery, a low-calorie food. 
For "reduced-calorie" foods, other rules apply. The reduction in calories must be at least one-third, the label must carry a comparison with regular food and the food must not be nutritionally inferior to its standard counterpart. 
Finally, foods designated sugar-free, sugarless, and no sugar must be either labeled low or reduced calorie, or else carry an explanatory phrase, such as "not a low-calorie food," or "useful only in not promoting tooth decay." For example, cookies baked with a sugar substitute might require such an explanation. 
But unlike calorie designations, the use of the term light on foods under FDA regulation is not defined. Whereas light breads usually contain fewer calories and more fiber than the standard, light olive oil is usually lighter in color and flavor but not in calories. And depending on alcohol content, some light beer may contain as many calories as regular beer. 
Why is labeling so complicated? There are many reasons. Some inconsistencies will be resolved sooner than others. As consumers, the only way to pare down fat and control caloric intake is to learn the rules, then use them in making your choices at the market. 
Rhubarb Nibbler Can Rest Easy -- Leaves, Not Stalks, Poisonous 
Question: I was blithely nibbling a stalk of raw rhubarb when my neighbor walked in and informed me that it is poisonous. I don't eat it raw in great quantity because of the tart taste, but I've never become ill from the amount I did consume. So is she wrong or right? 
Answer: Although your neighbor is wrong, we can understand her concern. For centuries, rhubarb was used as a medicinal herb. More than 300 years ago, it was suggested that the leaves could be eaten as food. Unfortunately the leaves contain a potentially fatal toxin. During World War I, Americans were encouraged to eat rhubarb as a vegetable supplement, and many cases of poisoning resulted from toxins in the leaves. 
But the problem is associated only with the leaf, not the stalk, even if eaten raw. 
Nutritionally, edible rhubarb is unremarkable, containing small amounts of minerals, and vitamins A and C. It does provide some calcium, but because it also contains oxalic acid, the mineral is probably not available to the body. Rhubarb is low in calories -- 16 per cup of raw fruit. 
Unless you use artificial sweetener, the tally quickly mounts as you add enough sugar to make it suitably sweet. A half-cup serving typically contains as many as 140 calories. Combining rhubarb with a sweet fruit such as strawberries allows you to use less sugar and keep down the calorie count. 
Q: My daughter insists on eating sushi and sashimi made with raw fish. How common is the problem of raw fish harboring worms? 
A: Reports of fish parasites have increased in the United States with the rising popularity of sushi and sashimi, and we have no way of knowing how many people spontaneously recover from fish-worm infections without seeking medical help. Even so, it is not expected to become a major health problem in this country. 
That said, we must note that for the occasional individual who does encounter the parasitic worms that inhabit fish, the experience can be sobering. 
Such a case was recently reported in the New England Journal of Medicine. A young man was admitted to the hospital with pain in his lower right side. Increasing severity of symptoms led to surgery for the removal of his appendix, which turned out to be normal. Before the abdominal incision was closed, a pinkish-red worm, over 1 1/2 inches long, was seen moving along the surgical drape covering him. The young man recovered. The report didn't mention whether he continues to eat sushi. 
The type of worm identified as the culprit, eustrongylides by name, had been found in only four other cases of fish infections. All were fishermen who had swallowed their bait minnows whole -- hardly a common practice. Three of them also required surgery. 
In an editorial accompanying the report, Peter M. Schanz, V.M.D., Ph.D., of the Centers for Disease Control, makes a surprising observation: Despite the rise in numbers of restaurants serving raw fish, the majority of fish-worm infections reported in the United States have been linked to food prepared at home. Restaurants have been involved only rarely. The same is also true in Japan, where authorities attribute it to the training and experience of the chefs. 
The bottom line? To reduce your risk to zero, eat your fish thoroughly cooked. 
Q: My husband claims that he heard a radio report that low blood cholesterol levels have been linked to greater likelihood of stroke. Is this true and, if so, does that mean it's dangerous to lower one's cholesterol? 
A: Hold steady. Such a relationship has been reported recently, but it in no way suggests that you should abandon efforts to lower cholesterol. 
The study that your husband heard about examined deaths from stroke in a group of nearly 351,000 men considered for enrollment in the MRFIT intervention trial, designed to evaluate approaches to reducing the risk of heart attack. The investigators examined information from death certificates of the men who had died six years later and compared this with data obtained as the men were evaluated for possible participation in the trial. 
They did find that risk of stroke caused by hemorrhage in the brain was higher in men with lower cholesterol levels. But that's not the whole story. First, this risk was confined to men with elevated diastolic blood pressure, a group in whom this type of hemorrhage is relatively common. 
Second, the increased risk was observed only among men with extremely low cholesterol levels, 160 milligrams per deciliter of blood -- well below average cholesterol levels in this country. Moreover, the inverse relationship between blood cholesterol levels and risk was limited to only one type of stroke. For other types, either no relationship was found, or risk increased as cholesterol levels rose. 
These findings need further investigation. But if you're wondering whether there's a risk trade-off in trying to lower serum cholesterol, the answer is no. The figures tell it best: In this study, after taking age into account, the death rate for hemorrhagic strokes in the brain was 2.36 per 10,000; for strokes not caused by hemorrhage (and not associated with lower blood cholesterol levels), it was 2.62 per 10,000. 