
DEAR JEANNE: Here is a relleno recipe that I grew up with. Could you please help me eliminate some fat and cholesterol?  -- DIANE, Poway, Calif. 
CHILES RELLENOS 
1/2 cup butter 
1 (7-ounce) can whole green chiles, rinsed 
1 pound shredded Jack cheese 
1/3 pound shredded Cheddar cheese 
3 eggs, beaten 
3/4 teaspoon salt 
1 cup buttermilk baking mix 
2 cups milk 
Melt butter in 13x9-inch pan. Place green chiles on top of melted butter, then top with combined cheeses. Mix together beaten eggs, salt, baking mix and milk. Pour over cheeses and bake at 350 degrees 40 to 45 minutes, until lightly browned. Makes 9 servings. 
DEAR DIANE: My revised recipe tastes every bit as good and is much better for you. By using reduced-fat cheeses and reducing the amount used, I was able to cut way down on the calories from fat and the cholesterol. Eliminating the egg yolks and just using whites in this casserole further reduced the cholesterol and fat. 
I also found that two tablespoons margarine was enough added fat with the tablespoon of oil I added with the egg whites (to compensate for the missing yolks). That's the reason for the nonfat dry milk powder as well. I simply made my own liquid egg substitute. Try my lightened version of this long-time favorite and see if you aren't just as pleased as I am with the results.  -- JEANNE 
LIGHTENED CHILES RELLENOS 
2 tablespoons corn-oil margarine 
1 (7-ounce) can whole green chiles, rinsed 
1/2 pound 20% fat-reduced Jack cheese, shredded 
1/4 pound 20% fat-reduced Cheddar cheese, shredded 
6 egg whites, lightly beaten 
1 tablespoon corn oil 
1 tablespoon instant nonfat dry milk powder 
1/2 teaspoon salt 
1 cup buttermilk baking mix 
2 cups nonfat milk 
Melt margarine in 13x9-inch baking dish, tilting to cover bottom of pan. Cut chiles into 1-inch-wide strips and place evenly over margarine. 
Combine shredded cheeses and spread evenly over chiles. Combine egg whites, corn oil, nonfat milk powder, salt, biscuit mix and milk. Mix well using wire whisk and pour over cheeses. Bake at 350 degrees 40 to 45 minutes until light golden brown. Makes 9 servings. 
Each serving contains approximately: 
Original Recipe: 
463 calories 
169 mg cholesterol 
36 gm fat 
1,138 mg sodium 
Revised Recipe: 
247 calories 
33 mg cholesterol 
15 gm fat 
778 mg sodium 