
Ghost Dad (Universal). Shooting in L.A. Sidney Poitier directs Bill Cosby in the genre the 'Cos knows best -- family comedy. What happens is Cosby learns how to better get in touch with his kids after a supernatural experience. Executive producer Stanley Robertson. Producer Terry Nelson. Screenwriters Phil Alden Robinson, Brent Maddock and S. S. Wilson. Easter release. 
Modern Love (Lyric). Shooting in Columbia, S. C. Robby Benson produces, directs and stars with wife Karla DeVito and Burt Reynolds as an ad exec whose recent marriage brings on the usual trials and tribulations that often follow. It's a comedy that also delves into some serious issues. Executive producers Michael Murphy and Joel Soisson. Also stars Fankie Valli and Kaye Ballard. 
Nightmare on Elm Street V (New Line). Shooting in Los Angeles. Here we go again, this time with Freddy Krueger (again played by Robert Englund) having the gall to take over a newborn child's soul. Producer Rupert Harvey. Director Stephen Hopkins. Screenwriter Jack Barslow. August release. 
She Devil (She Devil). Shooting in New York. Meryl Streep and beefy Roseanne Barr topline this yarn directed by "Desperately Seeking Susan's" Susan Seidelman. Barr portrays a clumsy housewife who devises some nifty schemes to avenge her hubby after he abandons her for Streep. Producer Jonathan Brett. Screenwriters Barry Strugatz and Mark Burns. Distributor Orion. Christmas release. 
Snakeeater's Revenge (Cinepix). Shooting in Montreal. Lorenzo Lamas reprises his role as tough city cop Soldier. This time he's summarily tossed into a mental ward after blowing away a gaggle of drug pushers. Executive producer Andre Link. Producer John Dunning. Director George Erschbamer. Screenwriters Dunning, Don Carmody and Michael Paseornek. 
Untitled John Boorman (Where the Heart Is Prod.). Shooting in Toronto and New York. "Hope and Glory's" John Boorman produces and directs this tale starring Dabney Coleman as a father who decides that the best possible thing for his children is to cut them off financially. Screenwriters Boorman and Telsche Boorman. Distributor Buena Vista. 