
THE LATEST titanic struggle wasn't in the prize ring, or between warring and rich husbands and wives, or in the Hollywood offices of agents talking about billing. 
It happened between those two respectable giants of publishing, the Book-of-the-Month Club and the Literary Guild. They entered into a really competitive fight trying to buy the latest novel of Judith Krantz. The Book-of-the-Month Club seldom ever buys commercial fiction of the Krantz stripe; they are more likely to seek history and biography. However, they wanted "Dazzle." Judith's past work has always gone to the Literary Guild, and the Guild again nailed down "Dazzle." 
They offered agent Mort Janklow $900,000 for book club rights. This does not begin to be the money Judith will make on her latest effort. She already earned millions in a three-book deal with Crown. And then, of course, there is the mini-movie to be made after this one is published next January. 
P.S. TO a recent tale about the talent drain at NBC. Emmy winner Bob Jamieson, reported leaving, is very happy about his decision. His agent, Stuart Witt, says it was Bob's idea not to renew after 18 years at NBC. He will begin toiling at ABC's New York bureau in April. 
HERE'S WHAT Donald Trump told me when I rang to ask what he thinks of the rampant rumor that a local weekly plans to do a story on him and Amanda Burden, the beautiful and social stepdaughter of William S. Paley and former wife to Steve Ross and Carter Burden. 
Trump said: "This would be very unfair to Miss Burden. I haven't seen the lady physically in 10 years. I hardly know her. There is absolutely no attraction between us. I have said it before -- half the women I am linked to or mentioned with are ones I have never even met." 
Trump went on to rave about the opening of his Taj Mahal in Atlantic City on April 5. His good news? Donald says, "I am fine, and the Taj is virtually unprecedented! People thought it would never open! People said nobody could build it and finish it, let alone bring it in on budget and open on time!" 
I DON'T know what USA Today means when they print a pointless, truncated, taken-out-of-context little story under the headline "Liz Smith's Sticky Situation." I don't find myself in any sticky situation. I am used to being criticized; it happens every day. This time, again, it seems to be for "having an uncomfortably cozy relationship with some celebs." Or words to that effect. 
But please, don't panic. I still firmly believe that being given a gossip column to write under your own byline means you have the leeway to get as uncomfortably cozy with celebrities and names and important people as possible. It's part of this particular job and goes with the territory. And sometimes you get great stories that way, and sometimes you are stymied and don't. 
Another big negative flash for you is the horrid revelation that I use material from press agents from time to time. I don't know what people think the gossip business is, or what columns they ever read that don't use help. Even the President has a press agent, named Marlin Fitzwater. So do the Pentagon, the networks, all big business and most publications. It isn't against the law for press agents to make a living. 