
A gunman packing a military assault rifle stole an undercover FBI car early Wednesday, forcing two federal agents away from the Mustang convertible as they sat talking near a Westchester fast-food restaurant, authorities said. 
Police issued a statewide all-points bulletin to law enforcement agencies about the car, an unmarked black 1990 model that was equipped with "at least one shotgun" and also may have carried information about ongoing FBI cases. 
Neither FBI agent was harmed during the incident near a McDonald's in Westchester, according to Los Angeles Police Cmdr. William Booth. He said the agents had parked in separate cars and were talking when the gunman approached about 12:30 a.m. 
Booth said the agents "were able to evade" the gunman without shots being fired, but he would not elaborate on how they escaped harm. 
A news service account of the episode quoted Sgt. Greg Correa of the Los Angeles Police Department's Pacific Division as saying that one agent ran away and leaped over a fence when the gunman pointed the assault rifle at him. The gunman then ordered the second agent out of the Mustang, jumped in and sped off, Correa said. 
Fred Reagan, an FBI spokesman in Los Angeles, refused to comment on the car theft. "We have a law enforcement reason for not making a statement and we're not going to make one," he said. 
Police investigators believe the gunman and an accomplice drove up to the agents in a black-topped gold 1979 Toyota Celica, a two-door sedan that had recently been stolen in Compton, Booth said. The gunman jumped out, commandeered the FBI's Mustang, then roared off with the Toyota following close behind. The Mustang was last seen heading east on Century Boulevard, away from Westchester, but authorities refused to report the exact location. 
The license plate of the Mustang is 2SKB931, and the Toyota's is 2LEL769, Booth said. 
The Mustang was fitted with a radio, cellular telephone and "at least one gun, probably more. At least a shotgun," Booth said. He refused to detail what else was in the car. 
The wire-service report said the FBI car contained three handguns, a shotgun, the agent's badge and information on active FBI cases. 
Booth asked that anyone with information on the FBI car should call the 911 emergency number to report it. 