
Just when I thought it was safe to leave the house again, some nuts in West Germany want to observe Christmas twice a year. 
You can almost guess where they're coming from. They're all members of a Father Christmas Union who say they can't make a living "coming to town" only once a year. They marched on Hamburg recently, demanding that a second Christmas be celebrated July 24 so they can earn more money. 
As I told my son when he won a pool at the office by picking more Academy Award winners than anyone else, "Don't get your hopes up, kid, it's seasonal work." 
I know people out there who at this moment have their Christmas cards bought, gifts squirreled away, and fruitcakes soaking up booze faster than George Hamilton soaks up the sun. I am happy to say I don't know them well. Maybe some people can get their acts together in seven months, but I'm on a different timetable. 
From Dec. 26 to Jan. 15, I buy at half-price my wrapping paper, ribbon and Christmas cards to store away in a "safe" place where I will never find them again. 
Beginning Jan. 20 through Feb. 1, I return Christmas gifts to stores whose salespeople acknowledge only that it is their box but have never seen the merchandise in their entire 30 years at the store. 
March 3 through the 25th, I take down the last of the Christmas decorations outside. From April through May, I accept catalogue merchandise on back order and that I no longer need, having replaced them with other gifts following Dec. 23 panic. I bundle up and return merchandise to catalogue companies for credit. 
May 25 to June 15 is major decisions time. Do I toss out fruitcakes I received as gifts or use them to build a gazebo? Do I toss out Christmas cards or save them until someone comes up with an idea of what to do with them? Do I freeze the remaining candy I got for Christmas or polish off the two pieces left and pitch the box? 
June 23: Make final payments on charges for Christmas purchases. 
June 24: Turn on television and see Santa Claus ho ho-ing there are only 30 days left before July Christmas. 
June 24: Check warranty on TV set to see if it is covered for owner's foot accidentally kicking in the screen. 
The idea of two Christmases will never fly. If it had a chance, merchants would have put a second one into motion years ago. Proponents seem to have forgotten we need permission from a higher authority. After all, whose birthday is it, anyway? 