
QUESTION: We are going to build a new home and have begun working with an architect on plans. At what point should we begin to consult with an interior designer? 
ANSWER: A designer should be called in at the same time as the architect. They should work closely together to achieve a well-functioning home for your lifestyle, and one that is aesthetically pleasing to you. This will be the best money you can spend and can save you thousands in costly mistakes and possible redos later. 
The qualified designer will be concerned with the actual function of the space for your lifestyle. The practical placement of furniture and the wall space required for that furniture. The designer helps see, enhance and translate your priorities. 
The designer understands traffic patterns, spatial relationships, scale and proportion, and color and texture, and what will be best suited to the period and style of your residence. 
DEBORAH LOCKE-KAHN 
Chairman of the Board, San Diego chapter, ISID 
Strong Combinations When Painting House 
Q: We are planning to paint the exterior of our home and do not want it to be bland or ordinary. On the other hand, we won't want it to stick out like a sore thumb. Can you suggest some combinations of colors to achieve a distinct appearance? 
A: Most people play it too safe when painting the exterior or their homes. A rich new color is an easy way to add distinction to a nondescript house. 
I've tried certain strong combinations that work wonderfully well on houses. I've found that painting the bulk of a building a strong/dark color and trimming out the woodwork, the overhang, window frames, shutters and roof trim in a very light color, with a darker accent color for the window sashes and doors. 
Do not paint natural, unpainted materials on the exterior of the house, such as weathered brick, wood shingles or stone unless they look ugly. 
SANDRA HAYES, ASID 
Fullerton 
Mixing 'Clubby' With Southwest Interiors 
Q: I like the Southwest style, but my husband prefers a "clubby look." You can imagine how difficult it is for us to agree when buying furniture. What combination can you suggest? 
A: First of all, we need to determine what the "clubby look" is. Perhaps old English, dark paneling, overstuffed furniture? This could be blended with Southwest only if both sides will concede to some compromise. 
Take the usual dark paneling and lighten to a natural or whitewash finish. If paint is the only wall element, a faux leather finish may be used. Add wood or slate floors and major upholstery pieces, such as big overstuffed sofas and chairs. Choose Indian blankets or poncho-style fabrics in darker, traditional colors. In accessories, again, the key is compromise. Some from each style can make you both happy. Don't forget, scale and color are important elements to consider when mixing styles. 
RAE WHEELER, ISID 
Woodland Hills 
EXTERIOR COLOR COMBINATIONS 
House 
Trim 
Sashes/Door 
camel beige 
white 
navy 
gray 
white 
navy or burgundy 
blue-gray 
white 
black 
forest green 
cream white 
burgundy 
dusty rose 
cream white 
burgundy or rust 
rust 
cream white 
chocolate brown 