
Donald J. Trump may have a lot of things, but it's clear that he doesn't have everything. The one thing he obviously doesn't have is shame. Or if he has any, he hides it well. 
Consider, if you will, Trump's endless boasting about how his Taj Mahal casino-hotel in Atlantic City, the biggest and most expensive building ever erected in New Jersey, was finished on time and on budget. Trump has made the on-time, on-budget claim so many times that he may even occasionally believe it himself. 
But when Trump is out of the limelight and has a legal obligation to tell something resembling the truth, he tells a somewhat different story about the Taj. In this version, the Taj finished about six weeks behind schedule and has a $65-million cost overrun. 
And the sure sign that the building's construction didn't work out as Trump planned is that he has agreed to wait "at least a year" to take the $10-million fee to which he's entitled for finishing the Taj. (Master Builder Trump actually paid Perini Corp. $1 million to manage the Taj's construction, but it would be churlish to point that out.) 
Trump leaving money uncollected? It's a violation of natural law. It's as if the sun rose in the west, an investment banker stopped caring about fees or a sucker got an even break. 
Where do you find this less-than-upbeat version of the way things are in Taj-land? In the 1989 annual report filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission earlier this month by something called Trump Taj Mahal Funding Inc. This obscure corporate creature, 100% owned by Trump, has its name on the bonds that were issued in November, 1988, to raise money for Trump to buy the partially built Taj Mahal from Resorts International and finish building it. 
Because Trump's reports to the Taj bondholders are subject to federal securities laws, Trump has a legal obligation to tell the truth in them -- an obligation that doesn't apply to his press releases or interviews. 
Read the Taj Mahal Funding documents, and you discover that the Taj cost $65 million more than it was budgeted for a year ago. Of the $65-million increase, Trump told Taj bondholders, $11.8 million consists of the interest paid on the Taj's bonds between the time the Taj was supposed to open and its actual opening date. You can argue that the interest is a bookkeeping item rather than a cost overrun -- but it does show that the building was finished late. The other $53.2 million of cost increases, Trump says, comes from design changes that he believes "will improve operating efficiency as well as the perceived and actual quality of the facility." Whatever that means. 
This overrun is probably the reason that the Taj, originally scheduled to be completed with the proceeds of the $675-million bond issue, has ended up borrowing another $50 million from banks. Should the Taj run through the bank money as well, Trump himself has to lend the next $25 million to the Taj, under terms of his contract with the Taj bondholders. As of Dec. 31, the Taj hadn't borrowed any money from Trump, but it may have borrowed some or all of it by now. 
How does Trump explain these differences between what he tells the public and what he told Taj bondholders? Beats me. I couldn't get him on the phone to discuss it. Not that it matters much, since Trump is not exactly the most reliable interviewee in the world. In our last conversation, he berated me for having been foolish enough to believe what he had said in the conversation before that one, in which he had sworn up and down that he would never sell control of Resorts International to Merv Griffin. No matter what he told me, Trump explained, I should have known that when he wants to buy, he acts as if he's selling, and that when he wants to sell, he acts as if he's buying. 
But even though you can't rate Trump too high on candor, you have to give him top marks for nerve. He has not only borrowed $675 million from bondholders and $50 million from banks, but he even borrowed the $75 million that he put into the Taj as his equity. 
How could even Trump do this? Easy. Documents on file at the New Jersey Casino Control Commission show that Trump got banks to lend him $75 million against money he doesn't have yet: the management fee that the Taj has agreed to pay him. Trump gets the fee, 1.75% of the Taj's revenue, provided that the Taj has made its interest payments first. The Taj would have to bring in more than $450 million a year -- or $1.2 million a day -- for Trump to take in enough management fees to cover the interest on the borrowed $75 million. 
What this means is that Trump has none of his own money tied up in the Taj, but he would have to dig into his own pocket to pay back the $75-million bank loan if the Taj goes belly-up. 
Does a $65-million overrun and a six-week construction delay mean that the Taj Mahal is going to fail? Obviously not. You're dealing here with a project that cost something on the order of $1.12 billion -- $870 million of Trump's money and $250 million of Resorts International's money. The $65 million is sales tax, not a disaster. 
But the extra $65 million does reduce Trump's margin for error. And it reminds us, once again, that when you lend money to a promoter, you damned well better read all those boring documents that he files. 