
Is anyone else suffering from zero overload? Every time I open the newspaper or turn on the television, it's a billion dollars here or a trillion there. I never understood all those zeros when Carl Sagan talked about them, but it didn't seem important then. Now that I have to pay a share of $500 billion to bail out the savings and loans, it's important. I've never owed on anything that had 11 zeros before. 
I can't get a handle on that much money. If $500 billion was broken down into $5 bills, would they reach around the world? If you stacked them and sat on them, would you get a nosebleed from the altitude? How many sheets could Imelda Marcos buy with them? If they were nose tissues, how long would they last 50 people with colds? 
The practice of zero dropping has gotten out of hand. No one even blinks anymore when talking about a national debt of $10.4 trillion, Adnan Khashoggi's apartment a steal at $33 million, or the California lottery being upped to $15.6 million to get people interested in it again. It's as if people have been numbed with Novocain. All those zeros mean nothing. 
The other night a television reader reported that Ivan Boesky took a tax writeoff on half of his $100-million settlement on insider trading. She gave it all the excitement of a kid swiping a tip at Denny's. 
Maybe our apathy started when plastic replaced money. We don't see money anymore; therefore, we place no value on it. We have forgotten what it looks like, how long it takes to get it, and how hard we have to work for it. 
On the news the other night there was talk about changing some of the denominations of money when someone observed, "Why don't we do away with the dollar bill? It's useless, and besides, it doesn't buy anything anymore." 
I hate to think I will eventually fall into the state of numbness where I will no longer question what all those zeros mean. If we are to be assaulted with numbers, why can't they be related to something? 
When a person is convicted of ripping off the government in nine zeros, tell me how many organ or bone marrow transplants that will buy. If a scam is involved, tell me how much money that would mean to cancer and AIDS research. 
If they're going to throw all those zeros at us, tell us how many hungry children it would feed or how many homeless it would house. Maybe we could get a little rage going here. 