
Question: What's appropriate to wear to a high school reunion dinner dance to be held this spring at a beautiful club? Specifically, what should a still-slim older woman wear if she wants to be in fashion, but not over-dressed? Escorts are asked to wear business suits. -- T.B.L. 
Answer: How about an evening suit? You'll feel appropriately dressed, especially if you make the suit jacket in a dressy fabric such as satin, lace or wool crepe and the skirt in a softer chiffon. The idea of a tailored jacket with soft skirt is newer than two pieces in the same fabric. 
The suit illustrated here is Ralph Lauren's design for Vogue Pattern 2090. You can make the skirt street length or longer, but the shorter length would be more compatible with the men's business suits. Your suit will look especially fashionable in navy or pale pastels such as dove gray, pale peach, blush pink or celadon. 
Q: I wish you'd tell designers to stop making all these black clothes. I think black is depressing. For weeks after Oprah Winfrey lost weight, she wore only black. I thought she was in mourning for her weight. Wearing all black takes away your individuality. In an age when there's a lot of stress, drugs, depression, teen-age suicide, etc., I feel the all-black style just induces that mood. 
Kids who wear all black seem to disappear, not stand out. I feel more in control when I'm given choices to make. Kids complain that they are bored as it is. Well, can you imagine how boring life is when you're wearing the same color every day? Perhaps the idea is to eliminate the color competition and get into personalities? I disagree. Clothes express your personality. I like variety. I like colors. I like being optimistic. I like freedom. -- S.C. 
A: And I like your letter. While there is a definite fashion trend to black for young people, and while black is still great for disguising fat, creating your own style is what clothes-wearing is all about. You might be interested in Paris knitwear queen Sonia Rykiel's views on color as expressed in her new book, "Celebration" (Des Femmes, Antoinette Fouque). 
Rykiel believes yellow is the most spectacular color. 
"It heightens or pales -- that depends on the makeup, which must be heavy or light. They say wearing yellow is to wear good luck. Yellow is an infinity of shades, a circle, a symbol of silence, the contrary of orange, which excites. 
"White means tradition," Rykiel writes. "It remains the color of the eternal. Blue is space, distance, universe. It calms; it is the color of hope. Pink, color of the body, color of flesh . . . invites. Green could only be of nature . . . it forces, it flounces. Red seizes the heart, is love, passion, the trigger. Black emphasizes, magnifies, pierces, strikes, rips, untouchable and inviolate." 
Black may pierce, strike and rip and it may be depressing, but I don't think it magnifies -- at least not in clothes. To the contrary, it causes shrinkage whenever it's worn.  Marylou Luther welcomes questions from readers. Mail to Clotheslines, Fashion89, The Times, Times Mirror Square, Los Angeles 90053. 