
Legislative bodies in area cities were reorganized in their first sessions after elections earlier this month. Councils picked mayors and mayors pro tem, and newly elected members were sworn in. In some instances, voting for the top council positions hinted at controversy to come, some of it carried over from bitter campaigns. But by and large, the meetings were mostly ceremonial and brief. 
Artesia 
Veteran Councilman Robert Jamison was chosen mayor for the fourth time. Jamison has been on the council since 1972. Councilman Ronald H. Oliver, who has been on the council since 1974, became vice mayor. Veteran Councilman Jim Van Horn and newcomer Mary Alyce Soares were sworn in. 
Bell 
In Bell, George Cole, who has been on the council for six years, was unanimously elected mayor. Cole replaces Ray Johnson, who was not up for reelection. Rolf Janssen, who was elected to his second term on the council, will continue as mayor pro tem. Jay Price was sworn in for the ninth time as a council member, and George Bass was elected to his first term. Bass replaced George Mirabal, who retired after four years on the council. 
Bellflower 
Randy Bomgaars was elected mayor and Bill Pendleton was elected mayor pro tem by a 4-1 vote Tuesday. Bomgaars replaced John Ansdell, who was reelected to his third term on the council. Pendleton, who was reelected to his second term, took the place of Bomgaars. Only Councilman Joe Cvetko voted against Bomgaars and Pendleton. He said later that he "had his own reasons" and declined to elaborate. Robert E. Stone, who defeated incumbent candidate Ken Cleveland, was sworn in to his first term. 
Bell Gardens 
Council members unanimously elected Alan Shelby as mayor and Bob Cunningham as mayor pro tem in a quick and quiet ceremony Tuesday. Shelby has been on the council nine years, Cunningham six. Ronald Bird, who was reelected to his second term, and Douglas O'Leary, who began his first, were sworn in as members of the new council. O'Leary replaced former Mayor Roger McComas, who retired after 22 years on the council. 
Commerce 
Councilman Ruben C. Batres replaced Ruth R. Aldaco Tuesday night as mayor. It is the first time as mayor for Batres, a first-term councilman. Artemio E. Navarro, also a first-term councilman, was elected mayor pro tem. 
Cudahy 
Mayor Joseph Graffio was reelected and Councilman Joseph Fregeau became mayor pro tem in a sparsely attended installation; Graffio and Fregeau were the only two members of the old council who attended. Fregeau replaces John Robertson as mayor pro tem. 
Newly elected council members Alex Rodriguez and Jack Cluck replaced incumbent Wilfred Colon, who sat on the council for four years, and Tom Thurman, who retired earlier this year. Colon and Robertson were both absent from the meeting. Colon could not be reached for comment, and Robertson said he could not attend for personal reasons. Both have signed a complaint with the state attorney general's office and the state Fair Political Practices Commission, alleging improper election activities by Graffio, Cluck, Rodriguez and acting City Manager Jack Joseph. 
Hawaiian Gardens 
One council seat was empty Tuesday when the City Council held its reorganization meeting. Councilman Venn Furgeson has resigned because of ill health. The council has not chosen a replacement. 
However, one new member, Domenic Ruggeri, was sworn in. The council also chose H.M. (Lennie) Wagner as mayor. Wagner, a kennel owner, is serving her first term on the council. Ruggeri was elected last week. 
Huntington Park 
Councilman Thomas E. Jackson, 53, was unanimously chosen by the council to be mayor, replacing Councilman William P. Cunningham. Jackson was first elected to the City Council in 1968 and has had the largely ceremonial position of mayor several times. 
Veteran Councilman Jack W. Parks was elected mayor pro tem. 
Raul Perez and Luis Hernandez took office Tuesday, becoming the first Latinos ever to sit on the City Council; Huntington Park is more than 90% Latino. Hernandez nominated Perez to be mayor pro tem, but the nomination died for lack of a second. 
About 70 people attended the organizational meeting to watch the new council take seats after the hard-fought campaign. Hernandez, 29, has been especially critical of incumbents, Councilman Jackson in particular. 
Hernandez was expected to take a council seat next to Jackson, but the veteran councilman directed Perez into the seat, and Hernandez took a place two seats away. 
All the council members pledged to work together. 
"These five people are going to find a way to make Huntington Park a better place to live, work and play," Jackson said. 
La Habra 
Mayor pro tem Dr. John Wible was elected mayor Tuesday night. He moved up from mayor pro tem and replaced former Mayor Jean Good. The new mayor pro tem is M. Jay Collins. Good and Gene Beckman are leaving the council. Their seats now belong to Richard Newbre and Diane Kane. 
Lakewood 
Wayne Piercy was elected by the City Council to be mayor for the coming year, replacing Larry Van Nostran. Meanwhile, Van Nostran began his fifth term on the council. A new member, Joe Esquival, was sworn in to replace retiring Councilwoman Jacqueline Rynerson. 
Piercy, 58, is principal of Long Beach Poly High School. He was mayor in 1974-76, then left the council, returning in 1987 to fill an unexpired term. He was elected to a full term the following year. 
Paramount 
Councilman Manuel E. Guillen was chosen mayor. Guillen has been on the council for four years. Newcomer Allen (Joe) Parker was selected vice mayor. Councilwoman Elvira (Vera) Amaro was officially sworn in. 
Pico Rivera 
The new mayor is Alberto Natividad. He succeeded John Chavez. Garth Gardner will be the mayor pro tem. Rick Mercado is the only council newcomer, replacing Gil De La Rosa. 
Signal Hill 
Councilman Louis A. Dare replaced Gerard Goedhart as mayor in a unanimous City Council vote, while Jessie Blacksmith was elected vice mayor. 
Carol A. Churchill was sworn in as councilwoman, replacing Sara Dodds Hanlon. 
South Gate 
Councilman Robert A. Philipp, who has been on the City Council since 1988, was selected mayor and Councilman Gregory Slaughter, who has elected to the council last year, was chosen vice mayor. 
Newcomers Mary Ann Buckles, Larry R. Leonard and Johnny Ramirez were sworn in. 