
It might have been billed as Richard M. Nixon's day, but the accolades were piled just as high for his wife, Pat, during a morning of speeches at the dedication of her husband's library. 
The 78-year-old former First Lady made one of her rare public appearances since a helicopter lifted the Nixons from the White House lawn the day after the President resigned in August, 1974. 
Time and various illnesses have left her frail, but she beamed Thursday as one speaker after another lauded her and the crowd delivered standing ovations. 
"She is a true, unsung hero of the Nixon Administration and our country owes her a great debt of gratitude," former President Ronald Reagan said. 
"A loyal wife, a caring mother and grandmother, Pat Nixon was one of our nation's most gracious First Ladies. She was a superbly charming hostess, whether in Washington or San Clemente," Reagan added. "And she represented our country splendidly when she traveled abroad." 
President Bush called her "a gracious First Lady who ranks among the most admired women of postwar America. The woman we know, and love, as Pat." 
"Mrs. Nixon, the Secret Service called you 'Starlight.' Your husband has said it best: you 'fit that name to a T,' " Bush said. 
Pat Nixon suffered a stroke in 1976, just after reading Washington Post journalist Bob Woodward's book "The Final Days." She since has been hospitalized for several other problems. 
"She's frail . . . but she has more energy than a team of horses," said Helene Drown of Rolling Hills Estates, who has known Pat Nixon since they were teachers at a Whittier high school more than 40 years ago. 
Drown said a few days ago that Pat Nixon, who has steadfastly stood by her husband, had been looking forward to the dedication. 
"I don't think she ever felt her husband was guilty of great crimes," she said. "I don't feel she's ever lost faith in her husband." 
Said Athalie Clark of Newport Beach, who loaned her Virginia farmhouse to the Nixons after he resigned the presidency, "I'm sure she's happy to come back to all this, and to hear the laurels and the accolades." 