
On the high-society block where Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and his wife, Raisa, will sleep tonight, the neighbors and their help know all about the demands of security. 
At Stanford University, where Gorbachev will speak Monday, students are taking the metal detectors and other precautions in stride, so anxious are they to get a glimpse of the Soviet leader and his wife. 
With Gorbachev's 8:45 p.m. arrival drawing near, hammer-and- sickle flags flap in the San Francisco Bay breeze. Vendors peddle T-shirts. And U.S. law enforcement authorities are polishing up their plans to encase the Soviet leader in the tightest security possible. 
For the past 10 days, U.S. Secret Service agents have been walking the routes the Gorbachevs will travel and have told residents in the Pacific Heights neighborhood where the couple will be staying to keep away from their windows and off their roofs, lest they be mistaken for snipers. 
During the next two days, the Secret Service will be responsible for ensuring the safety of 10 "protectees," all of them past or present leaders of nations and high government officials. 
In addition to Gorbachev, the Secret Service must protect former President Ronald Reagan, for instance, who will have breakfast with the Soviet leader at the consul general's home, and South Korean President Roh Tae Woo, who is scheduled to meet Gorbachev on Monday. 
"Logistically, it is a little bit more work," Richard McDrew, special agent in charge of the Secret Service in San Francisco, said of Roh's visit, announced last week. Then he amended the comment. The visit by the South Korean leader means "a lot more work." 
McDrew is a veteran of visits by presidents, Pope John Paul II in 1987 and Queen Elizabeth II in 1983. "I don't want to say it is routine, but it is standard," he said, noting that he simply requested extra armored limousines and agents from other offices to help with such functions as communications and bomb sweeping. 
The Secret Service is the U.S. agency responsible for protecting foreign leaders. On this occasion, the Secret Service will share the task with agents of the Soviet KGB and South Korean security agents. 
"Nobody identifies themselves as KGB," said Robert Freelen, Stanford's vice president for public affairs. "They just say they're Soviet security. They strike me as typical policemen who are interested in things they should be interested in." 
The Secret Service and KGB will be assisted by agencies ranging from the FBI to the California Highway Patrol as well as by police in San Francisco, Palo Alto and Stanford, and security officers at the Fairmont Hotel in San Francisco. Law enforcement officials would not say how much the policing would cost or how many would be involved. 
No one involved in the security planning seemed especially worried as they explained how traffic will be slowed whenever Gorbachev's 30-car motorcade travels down normally clogged freeways, or how demonstrators will be kept at bay, or how hundreds of people will be herded through metal detectors before hearing the Soviet leader speak. 
"We've had a lot of celebrities and ex-presidents before," said Jim McCarthy, head of security at the Fairmont Hotel, where Gorbachev will speak on Monday and meet privately with Roh. 
The Gorbachevs will stay at Soviet Consul General Valentin Kamenev's home, a Pacific Heights mansion monitored by a video camera and ringed by a wrought-iron fence on what may be San Francisco's toniest block -- the 2800 block of Broadway. 
A few doors away lives a member of the family that owns Levi Strauss. A Getty lives a few doors down in the other direction. 
Pacific Gas & Electric workers checked for leaking gas lines in front of the home late last week. Pacific Bell worker Paul Bowman, asked Saturday what he was doing with phone lines outside the consul general's home, replied, "It's secret." 
The street will be barricaded during the visit. Residents will have to park on nearby streets and walk home. Guards will check residents' identification before letting them pass. 
Security precautions are nothing new on the block. Hilda Gotcher, secretary to Dodie Rosekrans, a next-door neighbor of Kamenev, noted that not long ago, the family hosted a fund-raiser attended by former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger. 
Any inconvenience will be of little bother to Rosekrans. She is co-chairwoman of Friends of Raisa Gorbachev, and one of four people from the group scheduled to meet with Mrs. Gorbachev at the Kamenev residence Monday afternoon. 
After breakfast with the Reagans, the Gorbachevs will head to Stanford, 35 miles south. The trip will give the Soviets a chance to visit the Silicon Valley, an area few of their fellow citizens have seen, at least not openly. 
The university does no classified work. But the U.S. government has declared much of the Silicon Valley off-limits to Soviets because of the many defense contractors and companies there that develop technology coveted by Moscow. 
Counterintelligence experts assume that during state visits most spying ceases. Soviet agents will be busy protecting their leader and probably won't have time to gather intelligence, noted David W. Szady, head of the FBI's unit responsible for combatting Soviet spying in the Bay Area. 
"I'm sure they wouldn't want something to happen that would be an embarrassment," Szady said. ". . . Embarrassments -- that's what everybody protects against." 
At Stanford, officials issued tickets Friday to several thousand students and staff members to see Gorbachev arrive in the quadrangle Monday morning. The quad will be closed in the hours before the arrival. The business school, where Gorbachev will meet with selected students and faculty, also will be shut down. 
The 1,700 people who will attend Gorbachev's speech at Stanford's Memorial Auditorium will have to pass through metal detectors. No briefcases or cameras will be allowed. Hoover Tower will be closed during the visit. 
CHP officers will ensure that the 30-car motorcade travels Bay Area freeways swiftly between San Francisco, Stanford and San Francisco airport. 
Demonstrators are planning to mass outside the Fairmont when the Soviet leader speaks at the Nob Hill hotel. But San Francisco police doubt that he will draw anywhere near the thousands who protested against the Pope in 1987. 
THE GORBACHEVS' BAY AREA VISIT 
Here is Monday's itinerary for the visit by Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and his wife, Raisa, to San Francisco and Stanford University. The times are tentative: 
9 a.m. -- Former President Ronald Reagan and his wife, Nancy, arrive at Soviet consul general's home, 2820 Broadway, to have breakfast with the Gorbachevs. 
10:15 a.m. -- Gorbachevs leave for Stanford University. 
11 a.m. -- Gorbachevs meet with Stanford President Donald Kennedy and former Secretary of State George P. Shultz at the university Quadrangle. 
11:15 a.m. -- Gorbachevs tour Stanford Art Museum and receive gifts of art to Soviet people. 
Noon -- Gorbachevs visit Stanford Business School and meet with students and faculty at Littlefield Center. 
12:30 p.m. -- Soviet president delivers address to students and faculty at Memorial Auditorium. 
1:05 p.m. -- Gorbachevs leave Stanford to return to consul general's home. 
2:30 p.m. -- President Gorbachev arrives at San Francisco Chamber of Commerce luncheon at Fairmont Hotel. Gorbachev meets with San Francisco Mayor Art Agnos, Gov. George Deukmejian and West Coast business executives before the luncheon. Deukmejian and Agnos make presentations honoring the Soviet president. Gorbachev addresses the luncheon and participates in a question-and-answer session. 
2:30 p.m. -- Raisa Gorbachev, traveling by car, tours Golden Gate Park, the War Memorial Opera House, Davies Symphony Hall, the Bank of America Building and Fisherman's Wharf. 
4 p.m. -- Both Gorbachevs return to consul general's. 
4:15 p.m. -- Mrs. Gorbachev meets with Friends of Raisa Gorbachev. 
5:30 p.m. -- Gorbachevs drive to Vista Point and view the Golden Gate Bridge from the San Francisco side. 
6:05 p.m. -- Gorbachevs leave for airport. 
6:30 p.m. -- Airport departure. 