
There are baseball players who create a lot of runs by simply hitting baseballs over stadium fences. This is called the direct method. 
Then there are players such as Devon White, who hits balls out of stadiums, but also manufactures runs with bunts, brash and brute athletic prowess. It takes time; creating anything usually does. 
It was the fourth inning when White came to the plate against Baltimore Orioles starter Dave Schmidt. Neither team had scored, the Angels were riding a four-game losing streak, White had just eight hits in his last 53 at-bats. 
So he dropped a bunt down the third-base side. Schmidt, well aware of White's speed, frantically made his way to the ball but in his haste he forgot to pick it up. White stood at first with an infield single. 
With Wally Joyner at the plate, White took off to steal second. The Orioles, though, had thought of this and pitched out. Still, catcher Mickey's Tettleton's throw couldn't beat White to the bag. Joyner flied out to center. 
Brian Downing came to the plate. White took off for third. Tettleton threw again, this time high and over the head of Baltimore third baseman Rene Gonzales. White trotted home with the first run of the game. 
The steals were his 24th and 25th of the season. His dash to third and then home didn't come a moment too soon. Downing flied to center to end the inning. 
"That (White's run) was a big play for us," said Doug Rader, Angels manager. 
The Angels went on to win, 5-1, at Anaheim Stadium. 
Looking back on his fourth-inning odyssey, White simply shrugged and said: "Well, every now and then I get on base and those things happen." 
But opponents view White in far less casual terms. Witness Schmidt's bobble of White's bunt, or the fact that Tettleton's hurried throw was his first error in 98 games. 
Overall, it was a good night for White and his outfield mates Chili Davis and Claudell Washington. 
Davis went two for three. Washington hit a solo homer leading off the sixth inning. It was his ninth this season, which leads the Angels. 
But it is White who is the most creative, dangerous, enjoyable and perhaps gifted outfielder the Angels have or have ever had. 
Because of his recent slump, White was planning to bunt in the fourth the whole time. 
"I didn't care if the third baseman played up or not," he said. "I haven't been getting on base much. My purpose that time was to get to third with less than two outs. I'm just trying to make something happen. I haven't been hitting very well, so I'm trying to work my way through it." 
Rather humble words from a significant talent. Though White did let his guard down for a second. 
"This is a big part of my game," he said. "If they make the mistake of letting me get to base, I'm going to terrorize them for it." 