
The magnificent musicianship of the mighty Mstislav Rostropovich will grace the opening gala concert for Symphony Towers on Sept. 9, the San Diego Symphony announced Thursday. 
Another cellist, Lynn Harrell, also will play on the program, which is part of a celebration designed to raise $300,000. Harrell, who is music adviser to the symphony, will perform the cello solo from Richard Strauss' tone poem, "Don Quixote." 
Rostropovich's brilliant technique and burnished tone will be applied to one of two cello concertos written especially for him by Dmitri Shostakovich. Although he is music director of the National Symphony in Washington, Rostropovich is expected to appear only as a soloist, a symphony spokesman said Friday. 
Because music director designate Yoav Talmi has a previous engagement, the orchestra is seeking another conductor for the concert, Smith said. 
The choice of Rostropovich and Harrell as headliners, however, marks a departure from the decidedly "lite" programming for the 1985 concert that inaugurated Symphony Hall. For that concert, the orchestra served chiefly as an accompanist to popular entertainers such as Toni Tennille, Diahann Carroll and Joel Grey. 
Smith said the classical programming was chosen for September's gala concert because it "is in line" with the concerts that the orchestra normally presents in Symphony Hall. 
"The heart of our programming here is from the classical repertoire," Smith said. "That's the core programming of the San Diego Symphony." 
The concert is only part of the opening celebration that inaugurates the $143-million office, hotel and theater complex. Tickets range from $50, for the orchestra concert only, to $750, which buys grand tier seating in Symphony Hall, dinner in the tower's private dining room and dancing in the tower lobby. The $250 tickets are good for general seating, a pre-concert champagne reception, a buffet supper, dancing in the tower lobby and musical entertainment in the Symphony Towers Sky Lobby. 
In a deal struck with the developer of Symphony Towers, the orchestra will receive a percentage of yearly office rentals in the 34-story tower, the tallest in San Diego, up to a figure of about $135,000, Smith said. 
One of the world's premier cellists, Rostropovich was born in Baku, Azerbaijan, in the Soviet Union 1927. After defending Soviet author Alexander Solzhenitsyn in an open letter to General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev, Rostropovich was granted an exit visa along with his wife in 1974. 