
THE SIZZLE in publishing is all about Kitty Kelley's upcoming biography of Nancy Reagan. Word of mouth by the very few who have read the manuscript is fantastic. ICM is the agent-traffic cop keeping this big one under wraps. It will be published next spring. The work is being edited at Simon & Schuster, and lawyers are vetting it. There is more interest in Nancy's life by Kitty than in all the writer's previous tell-alls on Jackie, Liz and Sinatra. 
People who have read the Reagan book comment that it is "up close and personal," so unauthorized a view, "so hot, so wired, so secret," that it will knock our socks off. Kitty's editor, the respected Alice Mayhew, will only say, "Look, this is a real biography in the classic sense of a writer trying to understand another complicated human being." 
Kitty, still living in Washington, won't talk. I used to be one of her favorite people but not anymore. (Sigh.) 
NEW YORK columnist/gadfly Michael J. Thomas opined last week that he thinks the late William S. Paley would have relished his new biography by Sally Bedell Smith, titled "In All His Glory." Well, I doubt it. Paley wanted to keep his image shined up, just as most of the rest of us do. The network he created, CBS, tried to do its part with its memorial to Paley last week, and Dan Rather was relaxed and at his best along with Walter Cronkite, Don Hewitt, Audrey Meadows, George Burns, Danny Thomas, Norman Lear, Mike Dann and Fred Silverman. 
What this show did was remind us of what Paley wrought -- the genius comics he built up (Jack Benny, Burns & Allen, Gleason, Skelton, Lucy, Thomas etc.), the daring shows ("All In The Family," for instance), the great stars (Judy Garland, Carol Burnett, Mary Tyler Moore). And his way with the news. 
It's certainly OK to read Smith's book. You can't put the darned thing down. But the author is hard on Paley, and sometimes it seems as if the book forgets that he did create CBS and endowed it with taste and intelligence of a high order and with ethical news coverage. Smith is a little overboard on Paley's womanizing and social climbing. And while I do think those things were a part of Bill Paley, let me just repeat what one intimate of Paley's said recently: "She criticizes Bill for wanting to pal around with the likes of Jock Whitney. Well, who wouldn't have wanted to pal around with the likes of Jock Whitney?" 