
Perhaps first-year Cleveland High Coach Marc Paez can take solace in a few scribblings from last season's score book. 
For starters, Cleveland lost its opener to Westchester last season too. Afterward, though, the Cavaliers rebounded and spent most of the regular season ranked No. 2 in the state. Cleveland reeled off 18 consecutive wins after the loss, to boot. 
In other words, after losing in overtime, 78-75, to Westchester in a nonleague City Section opener at Cleveland on Wednesday night, an instant replay of last season would be just fine. But first things first: Wednesday's letdown beckons. 
"I'm disappointed in the score," Paez said. "I mean that facetiously." 
While Paez's tongue was planted firmly in cheek, those of the players were definitely hanging out. As usual for Cleveland, the tempo was at double-time pace, with the guards carrying the scoring load. 
The final moments of the fourth quarter were a blur too. Cleveland led, 54-52, after three quarters, but Westchester took advantage of Cleveland's pressing defense by making eight of its first 11 free-throw opportunities to take a 68-63 lead with 4:13 remaining. Cleveland's Eddie Hill, who finished with a game-high 27 points, led the comeback with a pair of quick baskets and an alley-oop assist to backcourt mate Pat McCook, who finished with 22 points in his first varsity game. 
McCook's basket cut Westchester's lead to 73-71, and Cleveland took advantage of a pair of missed one-and-one opportunities by the Comets and tied the score on Vincent Herring's follow shot underneath with 35 seconds remaining. 
In overtime, forward Mike Milligan (18 points) drilled a jump shot from the corner and knocked down another long shot with 1:18 remaining for a 77-75 lead. 
After Westchester's Kelly Robinson missed the front end of a one-and-one situation with 28 seconds remaining, Hill missed a running seven-footer with 15 seconds left. Out of desperation, Hill fouled Robinson, who made the first of two free throws for the decisive margin. 
After Robinson's miss, Hill missed an off-balance three-point shot attempt with one second left. 
Hill and McCook accounted for 49 of Cleveland's points. The youthful Cleveland bench -- depleted by the loss of seniors Andre Chevalier and Brandon Battle to academic eligibility -- scored just eight points. 
"In terms of talent, we're OK," Paez said. "Experience is where we need the work." 