
Question: I am so angry at my daughter's school nurse I wish I could fire her myself. Late last week I got a call from this woman saying I had to come get my little girl because she had lice. Needless to say, this was terribly humiliating for my child. 
I took her to the doctor immediately, and he prescribed an anti-lice rinse called Nix. He said one treatment would be sufficient, and we wouldn't have to worry about combing nits out of her long curly hair. 
But when she went back to school, I got another call from the school nurse. She made me take my daughter home again, because she discovered nits. I tried to explain about the treatment we had used, but she insisted that no child could be allowed in school with nits. 
I spent hours trying to comb nits out of my girl's hair, while she sobbed that it hurt. Why wouldn't the school nurse believe the doctor that removing the nits wasn't necessary? And if this ever happens again is there any easier way to get the nits out? I refuse to cut her hair. 
Answer: If the school has a no-nit policy, the nurse probably had no choice, although there was no need for her to be insensitive to your daughter's feelings. The doctor was right when he said that any nits left after treatment with Nix Creme Rinse (permethrin) would die upon hatching and pose no danger to other children. 
When nit removal is required, however, you might want to consider a new product called Step 2 (GenDerm Corp.). It contains formic acid in a creme rinse that helps loosen the adhesive holding lice eggs on the hair shaft, making them a little easier to remove. 
Q: Every time I see my doctor and have my blood pressure taken, it is high. He wants me to take medicine, but when I measure my blood pressure at home with a digital machine, it is perfect. 
I know my machine is accurate because I had the doctor check it. But why would my blood pressure vary so much? 
A: You may be suffering "white-coat hypertension." That means your blood pressure goes up in the presence of your doctor. 
Researchers are debating whether people like you need treatment. Many believe that blood pressure medicines are unnecessary in such a case and may pose a risk of side effects. 