
Cordless irons have returned to the limelight after an unsuccessful spark some years ago. The initial reaction from consumers was good -- a dream come true for many ironers who wanted that cord out of the way of the iron. The cords disappeared indeed but the wrinkles didn't. Returns were heavy and users complained of the following: the units didn't produce enough heat or enough steam, and some were even dripping. 
Because the cordless mode is so convenient and fast when ironing lightweight articles or for maneuvering easily and quickly around tablecloths, sheets, silks, curtains or awkward pleats, the idea didn't die. Two new cordless irons have just been unveiled and could be the solution to the pressing problems of the first products. There's Tefal Freeline 50 ($99.99) from France and Rowenta's Mode 2 (CS-01) Cord/Cordless Iron ($110) from West Germany. 
Both products are now hot items in Europe and are expected to pick up more sales volume in the year to come. Rowenta is playing the safe game by adding the corded adaptability in their Mode 2. (To iron with the cord, you can easily attach the adapter with a cord to the iron by unlocking it from the charging base.) 
Because of this dual flexibility, the iron was much better received than the single cordless, gaining consumer trust, according to Paul Pofcher, Rowenta's general manager. "Sometimes you need the power of a cord iron when ironing denims and linens," he explained, "the technology of a continuous high ironing power does not exist." 
A cordless iron undoubtedly picks up heat from a charging corded base. After closely examining ironing habits, Rowenta's study revealed that people iron for only seven to 15 seconds before adjusting the material being ironed. The company designed an iron and base that allows recharging to an ideal ironing temperature. 
Its 1200 wattage promises greater heat and steam while its increased use of metal mass (copper and chromium shield plus the iron's all metal body) makes for better heat retention. Another important design feature is the angled base on which the iron rests. 
"One of the most stressful part of ironing is when you lift and set back the iron flat on its heel," Pofcher said. "our unit slides back on its angled base in a natural motion." In other words it eliminates the need to continuously wrench wrists backward to rest the iron. 
Other advantages in this ironing system include a transparent water tank that's removable, and capacity for two steam power levels and a fine mist spray. 
And then there's Tefal, favored by many consumers for its smooth gliding soleplate, powerful steam and water spray plus self-cleaning feature. Tefal's sleek-looking cordless version has all these features plus more. The 1500-watt Freeline 50 retains heat for three minutes and recharges quickly when set back on its flat corded base, which has a hidden cord storage. It also has a removable anti-clogging valve and a safety thermal cut-off, meaning you don't need to worry if you leave the iron on -- it will shut off automatically. 
Tefal's Durilium soleplate has a 10-year warranty. The ultra-smooth plate has been tested to glide over zippers without scratching its surface. The test also proved that the force required to handle an iron with this plate was considerably less than with alternative materials.  The Rowenta Mode 2 Cord/Cordless Iron is available at Bullock's, Buffum's and Robinson's.  The Tefal Freeline 50 Iron will be available mid-November at Bullock's. 