
The city of Lawndale has hired four new department supervisors, who started work in the past two weeks, in a hiring drive that city officials hope will increase employee productivity and boost morale. 
The new employees -- a public works superintendent, a public works coordinator, a director of community development and a grant administrator -- are expected to rejuvenate the city's short-handed and beleaguered staff, said Assistant City Manager Paula J. Cone. 
"These people are excited and highly qualified," she said, adding that the city is recruiting for six other positions, including a senior accountant and a code-enforcement officer. 
Hyrum Fedje, the director of planning and building in South Pasadena, is the city's community development director; Barbara Workman, a grants administrator with the city of Pomona, is working as grants administrator; Mehrdad Kapanpour, a civil engineer for a private corporation in Hayward, is public works coordinator, and Patricia Hagler, the director of the Veterans Administration Los Angeles National Cemetery in Westwood, is the new public works superintendent. 
Several city officials said the new employees will fill vacancies in departments that have gone short-handed for several months and had caused some essential city projects to be delayed. 
"The biggest relief is having the vacancies filled," said City Planner Kendra Morries, who was forced to assume the duties of the community development director when Jim Arnold was promoted in November, 1988, to city manager. 
She said the vacancies have forced the staff in her department to put off such tasks as organizing the records and creating up-to-date maps and graphics for city planners. "Basic in-house stuff that makes our job easier and more accurate have suffered," she said. 
City officials also say they hope the extra help will raise the spirits of staff members who have been demoralized by the circumstances of the departure of several employees in the past two years. 
In October, 1987, the City Council fired Treasurer Ray Wood after learning of a disastrous securities investment in which the city lost $1.68 million. Two months later, the council asked for the resignation of City Manager Paul J. Philips after he came under fire because of serious problems in the Planning Department. 
Last November the council majority forced the resignation of City Manager Daniel P. Joseph, less than six months after he was hired. 
Staff morale suffered another blow in June when the City Council voted to lay off two 12-year employees to help raise $313,696 to pay for increased Sheriff's Department personnel. 
Barbara Grimes, who resigned last month as deputy city clerk, said she left Lawndale after three years because she wanted to advance her career and was unhappy with the "political turmoil at City Hall." 
Grimes, who now works as a development specialist with the Los Angeles County Community Development Commission, said working at Lawndale was frustrating because the five members of the City Council often publicly questioned and criticized the staff's work. 
"The council doesn't trust the staff. They don't let staff do their job," she said. 
City Clerk Neil Roth said he is optimistic that the city will find a replacement for Grimes by the end of this month. "It's going to boost morale because (staff members) have been doing two jobs," he said. 
Some city officials agreed in part with Grimes, saying employees have left Lawndale because the council does not support the staff and because it spends more energy on political squabbles than it does setting policy and enacting legislation. 
Workman, who said she did some investigation into the city before being hired, said she "never heard anything negative" about Lawndale. 
She said that although she has only worked for the city for two weeks, she feels it is an "energetic community" and that "everybody has been extremely kind." 
The disputes among City Council members -- which have become legendary -- have made it difficult for the staff to receive guidance from the council, city employees said. 
"It has been an example of multiple agendas and multiple priorities," Morries said. "It's difficult to find what their priorities are." 
Mayor Sarann Kruse acknowledged that the combative nature of the council members has made it difficult for her to provide leadership for the staff. 
"When you have a council that is unstable it is going to reflect throughout your city personnel," she said. 
Councilman Larry Rudolph said he believes the cause of the low morale is a combination of things, including the layoffs, the turnover in city managers and the investment scandal. 
He agreed that public criticism of staff members can add to the problem, but he said, "I don't criticize staff in public." 
Rudolph said he hopes the new employees improve morale among city workers. "I think we are headed on the right track," he said. 
However, he said he does not believe the city's reputation has been tarnished by the recent turmoil. 
Councilwoman Carol Norman disagreed, saying "we have a reputation and it's not a good one." 
Norman said she has attended meetings with other city officials, and "people laugh when the name (Lawndale) is brought up. . . . I've heard staff say they are leaving before their reputation can be destroyed." 
She said the staff has been demoralized because "it seems that the council has picked on individuals" rather than allow the city manager to supervise his employees. 
Norman said she believes the four new employees are "not going to be a cure" for the low staff morale "but it will be a step forward." 