
In an effort to ease traffic congestion caused by holiday shoppers, the city of Los Angeles on Friday deployed a helicopter, 18 tow trucks and dozens of police and traffic control officers to begin a crackdown on errant drivers and pedestrians. 
The Police Department and the city's Department of Transportation targeted 47 downtown intersections and nearly two dozen trouble spots in the San Fernando Valley, West Los Angeles and Hollywood. It is the second straight year the city has used the special traffic control plan to try to ease the holiday crunch. 
Throughout the season, police are expected to issue hundreds of tickets to jaywalkers and to drivers who violate the city's "anti-gridlock" ordinance, which makes it illegal to be caught in an intersection when the traffic signal turns red. And they got started on Friday with what officials said was a higher than normal number of tickets. 
Police said jaywalking tickets sometimes end with a warning, rather than a fine. The fines for "gridlock" violations begin at $50. 
The Department of Transportation stationed 75 traffic control officers at key intersections during rush hour to keep traffic flowing. Officials said they will "vigorously enforce" peak hour no-stopping restrictions. 
The special enforcement officers have been deployed from elsewhere in the police and transportation departments. 
Despite the enforcement measures, traffic was moving very slowly in some parts of the city Friday afternoon and some downtown areas were "totally gridlocked," said Sgt. Jack Sommers of the Central Traffic Division. 
Preliminary reports indicated that a higher-than-usual number of citations had been issued to drivers who violated the anti-gridlock ordinance and pedestrians who crossed streets in the middle of the block, Sommers said. 
The holiday traffic plan, in its second year, will remain in effect through late Christmas Eve. 
"Last year we saw that by targeting some of the most heavily used intersections in the city, we can greatly reduce traffic tie-ups throughout the city," Mayor Tom Bradley said. "I urge all drivers to closely follow posted parking restrictions and speed limits. 
"For a shopper who is trying to rush home from work to a store, or for those trying to get home after a long day of holiday planning, our traffic-reduction actions are the best gift in town," Bradley said. 
Traffic control officers have been directed to pay special attention to potential traffic problems on streets and access routes surrounding major shopping malls, Bradley said. In addition to using a helicopter to spot congestion, the Department of Transportation will use its automated surveillance control system to monitor traffic conditions. The system uses electronic sensors in the Central Business District to relay information about traffic volume to a central office, where operators can adjust traffic signals to ease flow. 
"There will be lots of people towed and lots of people ticketed if they don't pay attention to the signs," said Bill Bicker, Bradley's transportation coordinator. 