
The Nobel Prize in physics was awarded today to two Americans and a West German whose work led to the atomic clock used as an international standard. The chemistry prize went to two Americans for the discovery of surprising properties of the genetic material RNA. 
The physics award was given to Norman F. Ramsey of Harvard University for measurement techniques that led to the cesium atomic clock, and to Hans G. Dehmelt of the University of Washington and Wolfgang Paul of the University of Bonn for a method to isolate single atoms and make exacting measurements of them. 
Genetic Research 
The Nobel Prize in chemistry is shared by Thomas Cech, 41, of the University of Colorado, and Sidney Altman, 50, of Yale University. They showed independently in the 1970s and early 1980s that RNA, then thought to be merely a genetic messenger, could rearrange itself and produce chemical reactions. 
Their discovery "will probably provide a new tool for gene technology, with potential to create a new defense against viral infections," the Swedish Academy said. 
Half the physics prize will go to Ramsey, 74. The other half will be shared by Dehmelt, 67, and Paul, 76. 
"All three of them have developed exact methods of measurement, which has made it possible to conduct experiments that might force us to reconsider some basic physical laws, especially regarding time and space," said Ingvar Lindgren, chairman of the awarding committee. 
Prize Worth $469,000 
Each Nobel Prize is worth $469,000. 
Informed by the Associated Press that he had won the prize, Ramsey said: "Are you sure? It feels great. I'm just delighted, and I'm delighted with the people with whom I'm sharing the prize." 
Cech, reached in Boston, said: "My main emotion is that this is a great thing for the University of Colorado and the state of Colorado. This is not the sort of event that happens annually in the mountains the way it does in Boston. That gives me a really good feeling." 
The Canadian-born Altman, reached by telephone in New Haven, Conn., said, "I'm very happy. I'm very grateful to all my colleagues and co-workers, teachers and family." 
Americans have shared or won the chemistry prize 36 times among the 112 times it has been awarded since 1901. 
Fifty-two of the 134 recipients of the physics prize have been Americans. Last year's winners were Americans Leon Lederman, Melvin Schwartz and Jack Steinberger. 