
Cartel (Ronnie Hadar). Shooting in L.A. Actioner following the travails of an ex-Vietnam pilot who is framed by a vicious drug cartel but ultimately escapes from jail to take his vengeance. Executive producer Carol M. Rossi. Producer Ronnie Hadar. Director John Stewart. Screenwriter Moshe Hadar. Stars Miles O'Keeffe, Don Stroud, Suzanne Slater and William Smith. 
Facade (Concorde). Shooting in L.A. Catherine Oxenberg and David Naughton star in this thriller about soap star Oxenberg who is relentlessly stalked by a mysterious presence -- human or possibly otherwise. Producer Roger Corman. Director Larry Brand. Screenwriters Brand and Rebecca Reynolds. Also stars Jennifer Edwards (Blake's daughter). Spring release. 
Full Fathom Five (Concorde). Naval thriller with Michael Moriarty as a U.S. submarine captain who is sent down to intercept one of our nuclear subs which has been hijacked by South American terrorists. Based on the Bart Davis best-seller of the same name. Executive producer Roger Corman. Producer Luis Llosa. Director Carl Franklin. Screenwriter Davis. Also stars Maria Wrangle. 
Helena (A Woman With a Dream) (Cosfilm). Shooting in the U.S., Poland, Australia and Italy. Valerie Kaprisky, F. Murray Abraham, Jurgen Prochnow and Shelley Winters star in this life story inspired by cosmetics titan Helena Rubinstein. Executive producers Guy Collins, Stephen Kay and Klaus Hellwig. Producer/director/screenwriter Georges-Alain Vuille. 
Navy Seal (Orion). Shooting in Virginia and Spain. Charlie Sheen, Michael Biehn (rhymes with Sheen) and Joanne Whalley-Kilmer star in this Lewis Teague directed story of an elite American naval rescue team on a mission to retrieve Stinger Missiles which have fallen into the hands of Islamic terrorists. Producers Brenda Feigen and Bernard Williams. Screenwriter Angelo Pizzo. 
The Outsiders (Watchers II) (Concorde/Carolco). Shooting in L.A. Marc Singer and Tracy Scoggins topline this adaptation of Dean R. Koontz's best-selling science fiction adventure novel "Watchers." It seems as though some animal activists have unwittingly released some subjects of a government sponsored animal genetics experiment and terror quickly follows. Producer Roger Corman. Director Thierry Notz. Screenwriter Henry Dominic. Also stars Mike McDonald. Distributor Concorde. Spring release. David Pecchia 