
Each summer, they line up like soldiers in formation, according to their desired position. The problem, of course, is that there can only be so many generals. 
Such was the case last year when a rather stout and unknown sophomore named Brett Washington announced to Granada Hills High Coach Darryl Stroh that he wanted to be the Highlanders' next breakaway runner. Stroh, as he had done innumerable times with other varsity hopefuls, humored the lad. 
"He came in and he said he wanted to be a tailback," Stroh recalled. "And I said, 'Yeah, yeah, yeah, sure. You're more like a fullback and a nose guard.' " 
Washington, now a 5-foot-10, 215-pound junior, soon proved that his objectives were not necessarily out of kilter. And he restates the point every time the players line up for sprints. 
"You'd never know it," Stroh said, "But he usually finishes in the top one or two." 
After rushing for 165 yards in Granada Hills' 38-14 win over San Fernando in last Thursday's North Valley League showdown, Washington is indeed numero uno. 
After nine games, Washington has rushed for 1,082 yards in 139 carries (an average of 7.4 yards a carry) and scored 12 touchdowns. His rushing total leads all Valley-area City Section players. 
Washington, Granada Hills' only full-time, two-way starter, is the first Highlander to reach the 1,000-yard mark since Khalid Ali gained 1,388 in 1986. 
And Washington also is emerging as a favorite for the North Valley Player of the Year award. As a running back, he can pound inside or hit the corner and slice down the sideline. As a first-year linebacker -- he started at defensive tackle last year -- Washington uses his substantial bulk to put opponents down. And out. 
"He turned out to be too good to put down (on the defensive line)," Stroh said. "When he came in last year, we didn't know exactly what we had." 
Some opponents can't readily identify him, either. Washington has been likened by some to a runaway roller coaster. When handed the ball on a draw play, Washington is able to build momentum and is almost impossible to stop in a one-on-one situation. 
Two weeks ago, after Washington rolled through the middle of the Cleveland defensive line for another long gain, Cavalier Coach Steve Landress turned to a bystander and asked rhetorically: "Is that kid a load or what? He's a stud. There's no way one guy brings him down." 
And, considering that Cleveland is the only team that has kept Washington out of the end zone this year, those are some pretty decent kudos. 
Washington's 78-yard scoring run in the third quarter broke San Fernando. After being stopped for a short gain on third down, the Tigers were called for a face-mask penalty. On the next play, Washington took the handoff, worked his way outside and pulled away from several surprised -- and supposedly faster -- defensive backs. A tie soon turned into a rout. 
"The sign of a great back," Stroh said, "is to make the first guy miss. He knows that now." 
And if Washington knows this much now, what about next season? Perhaps after Canyon's Chris Perry -- who stands 6-2 and weighs 215 -- graduates this summer Washington will emerge as the area's next big thing. 
"Last year, he was good," Granada Hills co-Coach Tom Harp said. "This year, he's really improved -- he's almost great. Next year, who knows?" 