
Although Alzheimer's is the most common cause of dementia, there are more than 70 others. Dementia may be triggered by strokes, high blood pressure, alcoholism, medications, brain tumors and infections, depression and rare diseases that cause brain damage, including Pick's, Huntington's and Parkinson's. 
ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE 
The disease most closely associated with aging, Alzheimer's causes the progressive deterioration of the brain to such an extent as to render victims unable to recognize their spouses and immediate family. The patient may become confused, unable to concentrate and have trouble finishing sentences. More than 70% of the patients had behavioral disorders, such as unprovoked aggressiveness. Over time, Alzheimer's leaves victims as helpless (and just as needing) as children. 
No treatment is available to stop or reverse its degenerative effects. 
MULTI-INFARCT DEMENTIA 
Multi-infarct dementia, or vascular dementia, is caused by multiple strokes (infarcts) in the brain. Because the strokes usually occur before the symptoms of dementia appear, the onset of the dementia seems sudden. The strokes affect the part of the brain responsible for specific functions, such as calculations, and create the more generalized symptoms of disorientation and behavioral changes. Because of multi-infarct dementia's similarity to Alzheimer's, the two coexist in 15% to 20% of dementia patients. 
No cure or reversing process exists, but early assessment of cause can halt the progression of the disease. 
PARKINSON'S DISEASE 
Those with Parkinson's lack dopamine in their systems. This neurotransmitter helps control the tremor, stiffness and slowness characteristic of the disease. In late stages, some patients develop dementia. Parkinson's patients often develop Alzheimer's and, at times, Alzheimer's patients develop Parkinson's symptoms. 
Drugs can treat the motor symptoms associated with Parkinson's but do not improve any mental deterioration. Parkinson's is considered a model for drug research on Alzheimer's disease. 
Dollars and Financial Impact 
Fewer research dollars go toward studying Alzheimer's disease, and other dementing illnesses, than heart disease, cancer or AIDS. Yet, Alzheimer's, the fourth-leading cause of death among adults in the country, claims more than 100,000 lives annually. 
An estimated 4 million seniors suffer from the disease nationally, while Orange County has 40,000 Alzheimer's victims who struggle to cope with the mysteriously debilitating brain disorder. 
There is no known reason why the disease strikes people over the age of 60, and there is no known cure for this ultimately fatal disease. Further, total costs, which include diagnosis, treatment, long-term care and lost wages, is estimated to be more than $88 billion each year. 
The federal government covers $4.4 billion of these costs and state coffers are dipped into for another $4.1 billion. But the remaining $79 billion is borne by Alzheimer's patients and their families. 
RESEARCH DOLLARS AND THE FINANCIAL IMPACT OF DEMENTIAS ON SOCIETY 
Federal Research 
Estimated 
Funding 
Societal 
Disease 
Requests, 1991 
Costs, 1991 
(millions) 
(millions) 
Alzheimer's disease 
(and related disorders) 
$153 
$88,000 
Heart disease 
$704 
$94,000 
Cancer 
$1,580 
$72,000 
AIDS 
$1,695 
$66,000 
Differences Between AAMI and Alzheimer's Disease 
The term age-associated memory impairment (AAMI) refers to the minor memory difficulties that come with age, or are often brought on by stress. AAMI differs from Alzheimer's disease, and other related dementias, in that AAMI is neither debilitating nor progressive. 
Commonly thought of as "forgetfulness," AAMI can be brought on by grief, depression, illness, stress, medication, alcohol, fatigue, lack of concentration or just attempting to remember too many details at once. 
Alzheimer 
Activity 
Patient 
AAMI 
Forgets 
Whole experience 
Parts of an experience 
Remembers later 
Rarely 
Often 
Follow written or 
Gradually unable 
Usually able 
spoken directions 
Able to use notes, reminders 
Gradually unable 
Usually able 
Able to care for self 
Gradually unable 
Usually able 
Alzheimer's Disease 
Alzheimer's disease, often mistakenly thought to be the definition of dementia, is the most commonly known of the 60 possible causes of senile dementia. 
Declines in intellectual functions and in the ability to perform routine activities often renders dementia victims virtually without memory, as dependent as infants on the support of others to feed, clothe and bathe themselves. A steady loss of brain cells intensifies the symptoms of deteriorating memory, impaired judgment, depression, a lack of concentration and restlessness. 
In 1989, people 75 years and older ran the greatest risk of falling victim to the debilitating and often incurable symptoms of senile dementia. And, within the next 50 years, as the nation's senior population grows, the number of dementia patients is expected to triple. 
At what age are you most likely to fall victim to dementia? 
Age Range: Percentage 
55-64: 5 % 
65-74: 16 % 
75-84: 42 % 
85 and older: 37 % 
Source: Source: National Institute on Aging 
What Is Dementia? 
Dementia is a term applied to a group of progressively debilitating symptoms, including the inability to learn or remember information, repetitive behavior, inarticulateness and personality and behavioral changes. 
Even at advanced ages, memory loss that interferes with everyday life is not normal. Any person exhibiting an increased inability to think or reason should contact one of the local assessment centers in Orange County or consult a neurologist to determine the cause of the dementia. 
Progression rates of dementia vary, and depending on the condition causing the brain cells to deteriorate, often the symptoms can be minimized to slow progress of the disease. 
FACTS ABOUT DEMENTIA YOU SHOULD KNOW: 
* Nearly 20% of the causes of dementia can be corrected. Thyroid imbalances, brain tumors, drug intoxication, alcoholism and infections are just a few of the many treatable, and reversible, causes of dementia. 
* Alzheimer's disease is not a generic term for forgetfulness. Rather, Alzheimer's is the most common form of the progressive, degenerative and, ultimately, fatal diseases that produce dementia. Parkinson's disease, multi-infarct dementia, Huntington's disease, Lou Gehrig's disease and multiple sclerosis are other well-known diseases whose link to dementia are irreversible. 
* Early signs of dementia include memory problems, depression, anxiety and an inability to concentrate long enough to read or follow the plot of television shows. 
* In Orange County, there are more than 40,000 victims of Alzheimer's disease. Nationally, an estimated 4 million seniors are affected by the disease. By the year 2040, the total number of Alzheimer's disease victims is expected to triple. 
* Over 50% of all nursing home patients suffer from dementia-related disorders. The annual cost of nursing facility care ranges from $24,000 to $36,000. 
* An estimated 70% of all Alzheimer's victims are cared for at home, by their families. Annual costs of home care are approximately $18,000. 
* Congress is considering increasing the amount in federal spending allotted for Alzheimer's disease research to $132 million in fiscal year 1990, an increase that would average out to a little more than $50 per patient. By comparison, the National Institutes of Health invests 10 times that amount for research on cancer, heart disease and AIDS. 
* In the case of Alzheimer's, there is no cure and the cause of the disease is not known. 
ORANGE COUNTY ASSESSMENT FACILITIES 
For more information regarding the symptoms of dementia, or to schedule an assessment, contact one of the medical facilities listed below: 
UC Irvine 
Alzheimer's Disease Diagnostic and Treatment Center 
(714) 725-2382 
UCI Medical Center-HAPS Clinic 
(714) 634-6094 
Los Alamitos Medical Center 
714) 826-6400 Ext. 3279 
St. Jude Alzheimer's Assessment Center 
(714) 871-3280 Ext. 3059 
or call the Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Assn. at (714) 631-0245. 
Source: Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Assn. Inc. 