
One night of punk-rock nostalgia is threatening to splinter T.S.O.L. just when the band's future as a hard-rock contender seems most promising. 
Founding bassist Mike Roche once said that performing on stage with T.S.O.L. in its tumultuous early days was like standing in the eye of a hurricane. Now Roche is at the center of a storm that is gathering around a Dec. 29 reunion show at the Celebrity Theatre in which he and the three other original members of T.S.O.L. will play together for the first time since 1983. That show has created a crisis between Roche and two other current members of T.S.O.L., who object to the reunion. 
Roche, 28, is the only link between the punk band that emerged from Huntington Beach and Long Beach in the early '80s and the current T.S.O.L. (True Sounds of Liberty), which since 1984 has been honing a brand of hard rock influenced less by punk than by blues and heavy metal. 
For several years, Roche said in a recent interview, he had turned down lucrative offers to re-form the original T.S.O.L. because his focus was strictly on the current band. But strife between Roche and his current band mates, singer Joe Wood and drummer Mitch Dean, boiled over in a bitter argument that aborted a national tour during mid-October. Roche said the loss of tour income prompted him to accept a promoter's standing offer to reunite the original T.S.O.L. lineup for one night (the other original members are singer Jack Grisham, guitarist Ron Emory and drummer Todd Barnes). 
Now, with Wood and Dean opposing Roche's decision to play the reunion, the nostalgia show stands as a barrier to reconciliation within the current T.S.O.L. While this turmoil goes on, a strong new T.S.O.L. album, "Strangelove," sits ready for release by Enigma Records in February. The question now is whether the reunion show and the underlying internal problems it has brought to a head will touch off the second major shake-up in T.S.O.L.'s 10-year history, just as the band approaches its best opportunity yet to leap from cult status into the commercial mainstream. 
Roche said that money -- and, in part, revenge -- was his first motive for agreeing to reunite with the other original members of T.S.O.L. He said he was left in a financial lurch when Dean and Wood, after only two shows, flew home from a national tour following a "vicious" argument in Berkeley. Besides counting on the money from touring, Roche said, he had been relying on the cross-country trip as a way to stay clear of drugs -- a personal problem that he acknowledges has been a source of T.S.O.L.'s internal difficulties. 
"That tour was desperately important to me," Roche said, and without it, he seized upon a reunion of the original T.S.O.L. as his quickest way to raise cash. 
Since then, Roche said, he has come to believe that playing the reunion actually could be financially harmful to him if it costs him his place in the current T.S.O.L. "There's no way this show is going to earn me near the amount of money I can make in my band (the current T.S.O.L.) And there is no way I can get the satisfaction my band (gives). Not to mention the future. ("Strangelove") is the bomb. It's got hits on it. It's the best we've ever done. This is the blockbuster for us, if there's ever going to be one. This is so untimely for me. It's almost suicide." 
But Roche said he will go through with the reunion, costly as that could prove to be for his long-term interests. For one thing, he said, the show at decade's end will give the original T.S.O.L. the big send-off it never had when it broke up acrimoniously in 1983 (Grisham and Barnes left the band then and were replaced by Wood and Dean). Roche said there is "poetic justice" in playing a show at the end of the '80s with the band members who launched T.S.O.L. as teen-aged punk rockers back when the decade began. 
What's more, Roche said, far from doing any harm, a one-night reunion can only heighten interest in the current T.S.O.L. 
"I think I'm completely in my right to do the show. It's a (matter of) principle now. Is my existence in the new T.S.O.L. so fleeting and futile that doing or not doing this show can make or break the band? If they're adamant about leaving me out and moving on, if that's where our friendship is, I don't care to play with them anymore." 
In recent interviews, Wood and Roche both expressed a mixture of anger over the past and hope that they still can find their way to a reconciliation. 
"If he does the (reunion) show, it doesn't necessarily mean he won't be in the band," Wood said. "I would rather have him with us." Still, Wood said, Roche's involvement in the reunion would pose a stumbling block to reconciliation. 
What bothers Wood and Dean more than the reunion itself, Wood said, is that Roche scheduled it without consulting them, then decided to go ahead with it despite their objections. The reunion issue, Wood said, has become the focus for other underlying strains within T.S.O.L. -- with drug abuse the key problem to overcome. 
Wood said that he was deeply involved in hard drugs until he quit two years ago. "Every day, I'm a phone call away from going out and screwing up my life," he said. "I can't be around the drugs any more, for my own health and my own career." Roche and Dean both said in recent interviews that the collapse of T.S.O.L.'s tour in mid-October increased their resolve to overcome substance abuse problems, and that they have stayed away from drugs since then. 
"I'll do anything to make this band work," Roche said -- except cancel the original T.S.O.L.'s reunion. "I'll be ready to play, ready to work and tour -- and I'll be clean. If that's not good enough, I'm sorry." 
Mike Zoto, manager of the current T.S.O.L., said Tuesday that he has been staying in phone contact with Roche, Dean and Wood in hopes of mending the rift. An attempt is being made to draw up a new, written partnership agreement that would form the basis for the three members continuing as a band, he said. 
"I don't know if this (reunion) show is a nail in the coffin, but it doesn't help matters," Zoto said. "The show is one of a series of a year's worth of stuff that has built up and is boiling over the pot right now. Not doing the show might put the lid on the pot." 
Dean and Wood, meanwhile, were planning to play a T.S.O.L. show of their own at the Green Door in Montclair on the same night that Roche is scheduled to play with the original T.S.O.L. Wood said that an alternate bassist will fill in for Roche. "It's a chance to give Mike the opportunity to see that the band will play" with or without him, Wood said. "It's not permanent or anything, but we will do it." 
However, Patrick Bacich, booking agent for the Green Door, said Tuesday that he is canceling the club's T.S.O.L. show. "I wasn't aware the other (original) T.S.O.L. was playing the same night," he said. "I don't think it's practical. Even current T.S.O.L. fans would probably go to the other show because it's going to be a once-in-a-blue-moon thing. I have a feeling this date was booked to spite the original T.S.O.L. I don't want to be any part of that. That's getting into some weird territory." 
Turning from T.S.O.L. infighting to T.S.O.L. music-making, a tape of "Strangelove" that Roche played during an interview at his Long Beach apartment backed up the members' conviction that it is not only T.S.O.L.'s best album, but a potential hit. 
The songs are highly melodic and observe contemporary hard-rock conventions, which bodes well for commercial acceptance. But the performances preserve, and even intensify, the realism and gritty immediacy that has been T.S.O.L.'s hallmark. Guitarist Marshall Rohner's playing is magnificent -- fiery and free from heavy metal's whining, squiggly lined guitar cliches. Wood, whose bluesy growl was limited in the past, has taken a quantum leap as a vocalist and is now a striking singer who brings a much-expanded range to bear along with the emotional intensity that he always has possessed. 
If T.S.O.L.'s members need any extra incentive to reach their goal of emerging from the band's crisis intact, reconciled and drug-free, the reason is in their own record's grooves. 