
JAPAN'S computer makers are betting that the next generation of computer
users will fall into their laps - literally.
Japanese manufacturers believe their increasing supremacy in the production
and sale of laptop computers will lead to a significant expansion of Japan's
role in the overall computer market.
Japan's consumer electronics companies control half of the laptop and
notebook market, the industry's fastest growing segment. And Japanese
dominance of such critical technologies as disk drives and
liquid-crystal-displays (LCDs), together with Japanese skill at shrinking
components, has led such US stalwarts as IBM and Apple into joint ventures
with their Japanese competitors.
While laptops account for 13 per cent and 20 per cent of the European and US
PC market respectively, they account for almost half of all PCs sold in
Japan. Many analysts believe the European and US figures will double within
three years.
Japanese miniaturisation techniques are sure to help them lead the emerging
palmtop and tablet markets. Japanese companies are increasingly dominant in
disk drives, not only at the low end with hard drives for PCs, but at the
high end for mainframes.
The Japanese have worked hard to improve their software and service in
Japan, and hope to begin exporting such skills in the near future. Even with
their relatively limited presence in the computer-systems and software
market, Japanese manufacturers exported over Dollars 20bn-worth of
computer-related products last year, some 85 per cent of which were in parts
and peripherals.
Japanese makers are increasing their control of high density storage systems
as companies such as Epson and NEC continue to gain share at the expense of
small and medium-size US makers. Japanese companies are certain to widen
their dominant lead in display technologies, including those related to high
definition television (HDTV).
Sharp, Epson, and NEC have clearly established themselves as the world's
leaders in LCD technology. South Korea and Taiwan, their closest
competitors, are years behind, while US makers are virtually non-existent.
Such technologies are growing in importance as HDTV-related systems are used
in a widening variety of applications, including workstations which are
still dominated by US companies.
'There's no use in having a Rolls-Royce engine if you have a poor monitor,'
says Mr Barry Dargan, an analyst at James Capel Pacific in Tokyo.
Japanese producers are forging ahead in other areas, including taking
industry leader IBM head-on in mainframes. Japanese producers including NEC,
Hitachi, Fujitsu, and Toshiba believe their growing presence in PCs will
propel them into complete systems integration, particularly as the mainframe
market matures relative to PCs.
NEC boasts the fastest supercomputer in the world, the SX-3. Japanese
service networks continue to trail their US competitors, notably IBM.
However, Toshiba and NEC continue to improve their growing sales channels in
the US, while Fujitsu's purchase of ICL has catapulted Japan's largest
mainframe maker into the forefront of European sales and distribution
network channels.
Although the Japanese still trail in the development of software for export,
Japanese companies have become highly skilled at designing operating
software systems for the Japanese market. Hitachi and Fujitsu, in
particular, have devoted significant resources to the development of
world-class software.
Such investments will pay off in the future, particularly as the world moves
in the direction of more open industry standards such as Unix, the operating
system developed by A T & T which seems destined to become a world standard
for small computers.
In the end, Japanese computer makers greatest strength may be the growing
dominance of other Japanese industrial sectors. As Japanese industries such
as automobiles, pharmaceuticals, and steel continue to expand and automate,
they are sure to bring Japanese computer makers along with them.
'It's much tougher (for Japanese computer makers) to sell to GM than to
Toyota or Nissan,' says Mr Steven Myers, an analyst at Jardine Fleming in
Tokyo. Given that PC use in Japanese offices is one half that of Europe and
one quarter that in the US, Japan's internal market is poised for a period
of explosive growth.
Japan's estimated Y7,000bn information technology market is the world's
second largest, and is expected to more than double by the end of the
decade. Most of the increase in sales will fall to Japanese makers. Japanese
companies will continue to prefer to grow internally. However, more
companies may resort to either taking equity positions or outright
acquisitions in fields in which Japanese companies trail, such as processing
technologies and software.
'The Japanese have to catch up in some areas and they know it,' says Mr
Dargan. 'If they can't do it themselves, they'll engage in joint ventures or
acquisitions.' Joint ventures such as NMB-Intel are bound to increase as
capital-starved US companies increasingly turn to their deep-pocketed
Japanese competitors.
'Small West Coast tech houses are vulnerable to being cherry-picked,' says
Mr Dargan, pointing to TDK's Dollars 200m acquisition of Silicon Systems in
1989.
Still, Japan's dearth of software programmers - estimated at 600,000 - is
expected to top 1m by the end of the century. Such a shortfall, argue most
analysts, can only partially be made up by subcontracting work to Korea and
China and by buying small US producers. But Japanese computer makers remain
undaunted. If anything, the only impediments most Japanese companies see in
the way of their inevitable advance are political.
Fujitsu, for one, has been extremely wary of a political backlash in Europe
following its purchase of ICL and its exclusion from three of the five
European research consortia to which ICL belonged. Consequently, Japanese
makers will continue the less risky strategy of supplying European makers on
an OEM basis.
'Japanese manufacturers realise they just can't take market share through
competition alone,' says Mr Dargan. Japanese companies are diffusing
proprietary technologies in south-east Asia as the Newly Industrialized
Economies (NIEs) repeat Japan's previous policy of insisting on technology
transfer in return for access to their markets.
US companies, burned by their liberal sharing of technology with Japanese
companies in the past, are trying to demand a more equitable sharing of
know-how.
