
JAPANESE INVESTORS, who have in the past decade transformed world markets in
securities, property and art, are steadily being set free to invest in
commodities.
The Japanese authorities are gradually lowering the regulatory barriers
which have for a long time restricted Japanese investment in commodity
markets to a trickle.
The Japanese Parliament last month passed a new commodities' regulation law
which for the first time sets out rules for the sale and management of
commodity futures funds in Japan. The growth in commodities fund investment,
from a very small base, may be explosive.
The Ministry of International Trade and Industry or MITI, which sponsored
the new law, expects the accumulated total of Japanese funds to increase
fivefold in the next two or three years - from the current total of slightly
less than Y200bn (Dollars 1.4bn).
'If interest rates around the world decline (improving conditions for
commodity investment) the funds will grow even faster than that', says Mr
Koichi Akaishi, of MITI's commercial affairs office.
Mr Akaishi says that the traditional Japanese view that commodity markets
are too risky for sensible investors is giving way to a more rational
assessment of the balance of risk and return. 'People are learning to accept
risk', Mr Akaishi points out.
Some commodity fund managers are more cautious, warning that high interest
rates could dampen investment more effectively than MITI expects.
They point out that the new commodity law will remain more restrictive than
anything in force in the UK or the US. Important regulatory issues have
still to be decided by the three warring ministries with powers over
commodities investment: MITI; the Ministry of Finance; and the Ministry of
Agriculture.
Japan's giant trading companies, including Mitsubishi and Mitsui, are
leading the way in marketing funds, as are large non-bank finance groups -
including Orix, Japan's largest leasing company, and Sumisho Lease, a
leasing company affiliated to Sumitomo, another big trading concern.
Among others joining the fray are trust banks and securities companies,
which have the great advantage of national branch networks already in place
and selling financial products. A commodity fund association was established
last month with 30 members.
Foreign companies may have little chance marketing products in direct
competition with these powerful Japanese groups.
There is, however, considerable scope for foreign investment advisors to
manage funds collected by a Japanese partner, not least because Japanese
companies themselves have little experience of commodities fund management.
The funds will be invested mostly in instruments traded on US and European
exchanges, since Japanese commodity exchanges suffer from relatively low
volumes and high costs.
Already the leading Japanese fund marketing companies have reached
agreements with foreign managers: Mitsubishi with Baldwin, a US commodities
boutique; Mitsui with with ED & F. Man, the UK-based commodities group; and
Sumisho Lease with Rudolf Wolff, another UK-based concern. Orix is operating
in partnership with Commodities Corporation, a US company in which it bought
a 30 per cent stake in 1989.
Since few of these agreements are likely to be exclusive, other foreign
companies are hoping to strike similar fund management deals. These
companies include Merrill Lynch, Shearson Lehman and Salomon Brothers, all
US investment banks, and Cargill, the giant US commodities trader. MITI says
that it expects to licence about 40-50 sales companies and about ten
investment advisors.
Investors, salesmen and managers alike will need to keep a wary eye on three
ministries overseeing commodities, which have been involved in a prolonged
turf battle over the new industry. MITI has long supported the development
of commodity funds, in response from trading companies and others wanting to
develop the market.
The Ministry of Finance dragged its feet; it was partly concerned about
investor protection and also wanted to make sure that financial companies
had a chance to compete. The agriculture ministry feared losing its
traditional rights over farm products.
The first Japanese company to launch a commodity fund was Mitsubishi in
1988, with an offshore vehicle sold by its London finance subsidiary to
Japanese institutions.
The following year, funds worth Y43.8bn were sold and even more was expected
for 1990.
The scale of the offerings worried the finance ministry. Officials decided
that commodity futures were not commodities at all but financial
instruments. So they insisted that only financial companies - chiefly
securities companies - should be allowed to sell them. In the first half of
1990, funds worth only Y10.2bn were launched, as the finance ministry and
MITI slugged it out.
The new law forms part of an agreement reached late last year by the
ministries. Under pressure from the finance ministry, the minimum investment
unit will be Y100m, thus putting commodity funds out of reach of most
private investors. A ban on sales of funds to individuals is being dropped.
At least 50 per cent of the fund has to be invested in commodity futures. No
more than 30 per cent can be invested in cash and bonds, and nothing in
equities. That is to avoid treading on the toes of securities companies
which monopolise the market in equity investment funds.
The most important undecided issue is whether commodity futures funds will
be permitted to invest in financial futures. Fund managers say that this is
normal practice overseas, since price movements in commodity and financial
markets are inter-related. MITI supports the granting of permission. The
finance ministry has declined to make a decision.
All the funds so far authorised by MITI are closed-end, fixed-term funds
running for four to seven years. The managers are required to put 70 per
cent of the funds collected in a safe interest-bearing investment to ensure
investors get their original capital back. The remaining 30 per cent is
invested in commodities.
MITI would like to see investment in Japan's commodity exchanges, including
the Tokyo Commodity Exchange.
