
Nippon Yusen, the flag carrier of Japan's shipping lines, has always bought
its ships from domestic companies. But the long queue of buyers at Japanese
yards has just forced even the patriotic Nippon Yusen to turn to Taiwan for
a new bulk carrier.
'We haven't bought a ship from outside Japan since the end of the Second
World War. This is quite a historic thing. We would have to to wait three
years in Japan so we chose Taiwan. Anyway, it's cheaper there, about 10 per
cent cheaper,' a Nippon Yusen spokesman said.
Shipbuilding companies now complain that the biggest problem is not a lack
of orders, but a shortage of staff, and they are known to be routinely
turning down orders in the confident expectation that ship prices, up 17.9
per cent in the year to end March, will continue to rise.
At the NKK Corporation yard at Tsu on the central coast, the order books are
full until April 1994, and Mr Heiichiro Miyazaki, the company's managing
director, suggested that increasing demand is likely to mean supply
shortages and strong prices in the second half of the decade.
Having experienced a severe slump in the mid-1980s, the shipbuilders are
determined that price-cutting and other examples of 'excessive competition'
will not interfere with their long-term profit plans.
A spokesman for Mitsubishi Heavy Industries (MHI) said that production
facilities will not be increased, even though the company could take orders,
and Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries (IHI), with its facilities booked
until 1993, said that it built 10 ships last year, will build 10 ships this
year, and plans to build 10 ships in financial 1992.
'We don't have plans to increase our capacity, mainly because we have
problems finding workers. The other problem is that the low level of profits
we are now getting does not justify the level of capital investment needed
to increase capacity,' an IHI spokesman said.
Sumitomo Heavy Industries predicts a 40 per cent increase in pre-tax profit
for the year to March 1991, and Kawasaki Heavy Industries, which reported a
loss in 1988, expects a 20 per cent profit increase for the year. Mitsui
Engineering and Shipbuilding, which had operating losses in 1987 and 1988,
is likely to announce a Y4bn (Dollars 29m) pre-tax profit, about 5 per cent
up on 1989.
While the labour shortage is a serious problem - Japan's jobs to applicants
ratio is 1.46:1 - an automation drive has reduced the number of manual
working hours by about 70 per cent since 1973. As well, the companies and
the transport ministry are co-ordinating a campaign to improve the image of
shipbuilding to attract young workers.
The ministry is contributing to the image renovation campaign by sponsoring
the development of a futuristic cargo vessel, while it is presumed that
diversification into areas such as aerospace will help to change the
public's general impression of the heavy industrial companies.
Japanese shipbuilders are generally relieved that the era of savage
competition with South Korea is over. One company official said that there
is now pricing 'harmony' among the world's two largest shipbuilding nations,
which have close to 75 per cent of the market - Japanese companies estimate
that they have about 48 per cent and South Korean firms about 25 per cent.
While Japanese companies insist that supply has been limited by a 24 per
cent cut in capacity administered by the transport ministry, modernisation
of facilities has allowed the yards to build more ships per dock. About 80
per cent of the building is now done outside the dock itself, giving
companies the potential to increase capacity, if such an increase was
thought to be in the companies' best interests.
It is clear that Japanese builders are not planning such an increase, as it
would conflict with the general perception in the market of limited supply
and with hopes for a steady increase in prices over the next few years. As
prices increase, shipbuilding will become a more important revenue source
for the diversification-minded heavy industrials.
MHI said that shipbuilding accounts for about 9 per cent of sales, with
power plants, aircraft and other industrial equipment now more important
sources of incomes. But shipbuilding still accounts for about 36 per cent of
sales at Hitachi Zosen. This company expects pre-tax profits to more than
double to Y5bn in the year to March 1991.
