
LIKE A bruising heavyweight boxer scoring a famous victory, Manchester
out-slugged London yesterday and won the right to bid for the Olympic Games
in the year 2000. The result was a terrible mauling for the capital but a
powerful boost to Manchester and north-west England.
At a meeting of the British Olympic Association (BOA) in London, Manchester
won unanimous support for its bid and was thus catapulted into the
billionaire bidding game that will preface the millennial Olympics.
The host city for the Games of 2000 will be chosen by the International
Olympic Committee in September 1993. Manchester's rivals are expected to
include Berlin, Peking, Sydney, Milan, Brasilia and Belgrade.
Last September Manchester was roundly defeated in its bid to stage the 1996
Olympics, which were won by Atlanta. But it says it has learnt from that
episode, and that its new bid will be better and stronger.
Mr Bob Scott, chairman of the Manchester Olympic bid committee, said
yesterday: 'We're going to go hell for leather for 2000. This is not just
Manchester's bid. It is the British bid.'
London's campaign was led by Mr Sebastian Coe - Olympic gold-medal runner,
millionaire world record holder and would-be Conservative MP. After losing
the vote, Mr Coe, crest-fallen, claimed London had mounted a credible bid.
The hope had been that a successful London campaign would have proved a
fillip for development in the Docklands area of east London and a spur to
accelerating transport and other spending.
But Mr Coe was floored by a campaign led by an even richer man, the Duke of
Westminster, president of the Manchester committee, who told the BOA that he
was not a Londoner but had lived in Chester for 22 years - and his family
for 900.
From the briskness and gumption displayed by the Duke and his colleagues, it
was clear Manchester was going to keep bidding for the Olympics until it won
them.
Manchester city council has said it will underwrite the bid. Fourteen
Olympic-style sports venues are said to exist already in Manchester and the
North-west, with eight to be built or under construction by September 1993
and a further five at the planning stage.
Manchester claims that its transport infrastructure is the best in Britain,
and that the core sports venues and planned Olympic village would be within
15 minutes of each other.
Mr Graham Stringer, leader of Manchester city council, said: 'We are
determined to give Manchester, and Britain, the best possible platform for
its case to host the 2000 Games.'
A study by Kleinwort Benson has forecast an Olympic operating surplus of
around Pounds 190m if Manchester wins.
According to insiders Manchester beat London because of the technical
competence of its experience of Olympic in-fighting. What hampered London,
it is thought - the BOA would not say - was the capital's lack of an
umbrella council, its crowdedness, grime, and terrible transport.
Yesterday it was tottery old London versus a wily and free-punching northern
foe - virtually a push-over.
