
A EUROPEAN intervention force should be established to help secure peace in
areas threatened by civil war such as Yugoslavia, or to tackle ecological
disasters like the recent Italian oil spillage, according to Mr Willy
Brandt, the former West German chancellor.
In an interview before visiting New York today to spell out proposals to
reform the United Nations and improve its world development role, Mr Brandt
strongly favoured greater security co-operation among European countries as
part of moves towards European political union.
He also favoured extending the European Community eastwards, saying it was
in Germany's own interest to support the eventual adhesion of Poland,
Czechoslovakia and Hungary to ward off the risks of disruptive migration
towards the west.
Mr Brandt noted that the German-Polish co-operation treaty being signed next
month commits Bonn to backing Polish membership of the EC. It was vital to
give these countries the prospect of joining, even if full membership were
10 years away, he said.
Underlining a turnaround in the thinking of the opposition Social Democratic
Party, of which Mr Brandt is still honorary chairman, he said he was in
favour of military intervention in another country's affairs in cases of
gross abuses of human rights.
On the question of allowing the German army to operate outside Nato, Mr
Brandt said he supported changing the constitution to allow the Bundeswehr
to be used outside Nato in all military operations which have UN backing.
But he left open whether the SPD party congress next month would back a
limit on Bundeswehr deployment simply to UN peace-keeping.
Mr Brandt said he was against asking for a permanent seat for Germany on the
Security Council. Any attempt by Germany to promote the idea - first floated
by the Soviet Union last year - would create so much controversy that it
could easily block reforms aimed at making the UN more effective, he said.
Rather, France and Britain, the two European permanent members of the
council, should be encouraged to use their voices to represent European
Community opinion. This could be a prelude to giving the EC formal
representation on the council.
Mr Brandt returned to the headlines for his concern about world development
with the Brandt Commission report carried out at the end of the 1970s.
Looking back, he denied feeling depressed about events during the last
decade. But he conceded that, largely as a result of a lack of new lending,
international resources were now flowing from the developing to the
developed world, rather than the other way around. 'Not everything has
become worse. But everything is much more complicated.'
