
Chicago's Park District did not intend to enter the recycling business three
years ago when it untook to refurbish 360 of its neighbourhood playgrounds.
Some 3.5m pounds of plastic later, the city has become a model for other
communities seeking to convert household waste into indestructible timber
substitutes, park benches and play equipment.
The city stumbled into its Plastic On Parks programme after one manufacturer
suggested that plastic would survive the hazards of Chicago's winters and
gang graffiti better than wood. At first the idea did not seem attractive -
plastic was nearly twice as expensive as wood. However, the gap would be
halved if the City provided the raw plastic for the programme.
Gathering piles of used milk and soft drink bottles, cleaning-fluid
containers and plastic shopping bags seemed daunting at first. Chicago had
no city-wide recycling programme, but bins were set out at 263 park sports
facilities. Residents were encouraged to drop off their empties.
'The first week we collected 400 pounds and thought we had a good
programme,' recalls Fred White, director of Chicago's parks recycling
programme. 'Now we're collecting 30,000 to 45,000 pounds per week, and
people refuse to let us stop.' Parks staff empty the bins and the discards
are delivered to a recycler for processing. Private donations provided two
new trucks for the programme.
White believes one of the reasons for the programme's success is that people
can see the results of their efforts in their neighbourhoods. A unique
feature of POP is the city's requirement that plastic given to the processor
must return to Chicago.
Hammers Plastic Recycling, the Iowa-based processor for the programme,
recently opened a Chicago manufacturing facility where it has hired 12
people to help fulfil the city's Dollars 1m (Pounds 600,000) contract.
Ken Iles, marketing director of the company, says the POP plastic is now
being converted into basketball backstops, picnic tables and special plastic
wheelchair ramps for Chicago's beaches, as well as timber substitutes and
park benches.
