
LAST YEAR, the UK's balance of trade deficit on motor vehicles shrank
sharply from more than Pounds 6bn to about Pounds 1.5bn. Much of the fall
was due to a UK new car market collapse, preventing the usual high volume of
imports from being sucked in.
Even so, Mr Geoffrey Whalen, UK motor industry veteran, past president of
the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, and Chevalier de la Legion
d'Honneur, could derive much satisfaction from the export contribution made
by Peugeot Talbot, the French vehicles group's UK subsidiary, of which he
has been chief executive for nearly a decade.
It is that contribution, notably the overseas shipment in recent years of
seven out of every 10 cars that Peugeot Talbot produces at its Ryton plant
near Coventry, which has led to its receipt of the Queen's Award for
exporting.
Along the way, and partly as a reflection of its colourful, varied and
sometimes troubled past, Peugeot Talbot has developed markets for its cars
and parts not just in France and other EC states, but in Australasia,
south-east Asia, Africa and Pakistan. New markets are being found in eastern
Europe, one of the world's main potential growth areas for vehicles - at
least in the long term - with Hungary and Czechoslovakia among the company's
Peugeot Talbot's early targets.
In unit terms, the company's export contribution last year amounted to
60,000 cars - all versions of the Peugeot 405, the medium-sized saloon which
is the only model currently produced by Peugeot Talbot's 6,000-strong UK
workforce.
To put that in context, total output at Ryton was 87,000 cars, so the
precise export content was just under 69 per cent. The previous year, before
the UK market began collapsing, Ryton built 116,000 cars, of which more than
81,000 went for export. These UK-built 405s went to a total of 20 countries,
although numerically by far the greatest proportion went to France and other
EC states.
Despite the award, in financial terms Peugeot Talbot almost certainly
remains a net importer. Its rapidly rising market share in the UK -
currently around 7 per cent - means that last year's UK sales of around
112,000 units were met by 17,000 UK-built 405s and more than 90,000 Peugeot
205, 309 and 605 models imported from Peugeot's continental plants. In
addition, many of the parts used to produce the Ryton-built cars are
imported from the Continent.
Given that in the early 1980s there were strong doubts as to whether Peugeot
Talbot had any kind of manufacturing future in the UK, however, the
company's achievements are not to be underestimated.
Born out of the French parent's takeover of Chrysler's deeply-troubled
European activities in the late 1970s, Peugeot Talbot inherited in the UK,
for example, the ill-fated Linwood plant in Scotland and lacklustre models
such as the Hillman Avenger, Sunbeam and Alpine - plus a valuable contract
supplying Peykans (essentially rebadged Hillman Hunters) to Iran in
quantities which at their peak hit 100,000 a year.
Linwood's closure, the Iranian revolution and shrinking UK sales had by 1983
created a pretty grim picture. The decision to withdraw all design and
development activities from the UK inevitably created fears that Peugeot
Talbot would become just a sales company for foreign-built Peugeots.
Peugeot agonised, looked at the industrial relations improvements being
nurtured by Mr Whalen in his initial role as personnel director - and
decided to invest Pounds 30m in re-equipping Ryton to produce a fully
competitive car, the Peugeot 309. By 1987, far from manufacturing
disappearing from Ryton, there was talk of putting on a night shift. Two
years later, with the larger 405 proving one of Europe's major success
stories, Ryton was dedicated to producing the 405 exclusively.
Next year, however, Peugeot Talbot's own balance of trade pendulum should be
swinging sharply towards the positive once more: Ryton is to become a
two-model plant again, building the replacement for the 309 as well as the
405. When, as expected, the good times return to the UK new car market
towards the mid-1990s, Peugeot Talbot is expected not only to have the
capacity to make 200,000 cars a year, but actually to be using it.
