
OF ALL the 20th century's scientific revolutions, the one with the greatest
potential to transform life is the unravelling of the secrets of human
genes.
Within 15 years, scientists expect to have decoded all of the 100,000 genes
which are the blueprint for individual development from the foetus until old
age. This information, encoded chemically in every living cell, is stored in
spiral ribbons of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), which is analogous to
computer tapes. Decoding them could confer an almost Godlike power to
foresee - and to change - an individual's destiny. The question whether this
power will be used for good or ill raises deep moral issues which will
result in fierce debate as the technology improves.
The practical development of genetics is, however, no more advanced than
electronics was in the transistor age of the 1950s. Very few people have had
direct personal experience of genetic medicine and research efforts in
hundreds of laboratories around the world are dimly understood in the world
outside.
The genetic revolution has therefore made little impact on the public
imagination, says Dr Steve Jones, head of the genetics department at
University College, London, who tried to bring home its implications in his
recent Reith Lectures on BBC Radio. 'But it is going to have a dramatic
effect on many people. You will be able to get a good idea of what you are
going to die from and when - or, to be more positive, to know what diseases
you are at risk from so that you can avoid them.'
Research is coordinated through an international programme, the Human Genome
Mapping Project, with total expenditure estimated at Dollars 3bn (Pounds
1.6bn) over the next 15 years. Since gene mapping started in the early
1970s, the pace has accelerated rapidly. Scientists have now located about
2,700 genes, including those responsible for common inherited diseases such
as cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy and haemophilia - and the gender gene
which determines whether the embryo becomes a boy or girl.
Practical uses of the new genetic knowledge fall into two broad categories:
testing or screening to discover whether an individual is carrying
particular genes; and therapy to change a person's genes. Both bring the
promise of immense medical benefits, balanced by terrifying possibilities
for abuse.
The embarrassing record of some of their predecessors in the 1920s and
1930s, who were only too willing to advocate eugenics and racial purity, has
increased the reluctance of today's researchers to speak publicly about
human genetic engineering.
'There has been an astonishing shift of attitude over the last 50 years,'
Jones observes. 'In the 1930s, when genetics was a series of prejudices and
our information was effectively zero, the scientific literature was full of
proposals for eugenics. Now that we are gaining the knowledge to 'improve
the human race' people don't want to think about it.'
Pre-natal testing is already available in about the eighth week of pregnancy
for several disorders caused by single genetic defects, including cystic
fibrosis, phenylketonuria, muscular dystrophy and thalassaemia. If the
defective gene is present, the mother is offered an abortion. Extensive
genetic testing for thalassaemia, a severe form of anaemia common in the
Mediterranean region, has greatly reduced the incidence of this disease.
For those opposed to abortion, this form of preventative medicine is
unacceptable. But the medical profession regards it as morally equivalent to -and a great practical improvement on - amniocentesis, a cruder and more
limited non-genetic test for foetal abnormalities which is offered to older
mothers.
At the same time, foundations are being laid for genetic screening of the
general population. The UK Medical Research Council is sponsoring five
trials of screening for cystic fibrosis, the UK's most common serious
inherited disease, which clogs the lungs with a thick mucus and kills most
sufferers before the age of 30. Participants simply have to wash out their
mouths to provide enough cells to test for the defective gene.
'We are examining whether we can deliver an acceptable model of mass
screening,' says Dr David Brock, professor of human genetics at Edinburgh
University. 'Any type of screening has the capacity to disturb as well as
reassure. Being told that they are a carrier of a CF gene may be quite
upsetting to some people, however carefully they have been prepared.' Those
taking the tests are told that people carrying one copy of the defective
gene are quite healthy, but if they marry someone with the same defect the
children will have a one in four chance of developing cystic fibrosis. As
more genes are identified such ethical problems will multiply.
The main medical problems of western society - cancer, heart disease and
mental illness - result from a complicated interaction between genetic and
environmental factors. Genetic testing may reveal an unusual susceptibility
to alcoholism or schizophrenia, heart attack or lung cancer, but predictions
may be uncertain.
A pregnant woman told unambiguously that her baby will suffer from cystic
fibrosis is likely to opt for abortion. But what decision will she make if,
for example, she is told there is a one in five chance of the baby growing
up schizophrenic? For adults, genetic testing could throw up disturbing
uncertainties. If we had a full print-out of our genes, all of us would
discover that we carried several potentially lethal recessive genes (which
have no effect unless the other parent has a similar gene).
On the other hand a genetic print-out, properly interpreted, would give
everyone a personal guide as to which activities could be harmful and which
might be safely indulged. You might be told, for example, that you can eat
fatty foods freely, having no disposition to heart disease or bowel cancer,
but must avoid alcohol because you are susceptible to alcoholism. Advice
based on one's own gene pattern could be much more persuasive than today's
generalised do's and don'ts.
But unless social attitudes and the legal framework change, the
disincentives to taking genetic tests could be formidable. Those who turned
out to have bad genes could face discrimination in access to health and life
insurance, education and even employment, if the information were made
available to other people.
It is easy to imagine computer technology, including artificial
intelligence, being combined with genetic screening to draw conclusions
about people's suitability for particular jobs or careers. Large companies
may build up a genetic database of their staff and discover that employees
with certain gene combinations do well and others do badly.
That might sound an alarming echo of Huxley's Brave New World or a route to
better career counselling, depending on the point of view. Even the deepest
personal relationships could be influenced if genetic testing for disease or
compatibility were accepted in some cultures as a precursor of marriage.
Many researchers agree with Sir Walter Bodmer, director of the Imperial
Cancer Research Fund and president of the international Human Genome Mapping
Organisation, that a new legal framework is needed for genetic medicine. But
the interested parties are nowhere near reaching agreement about its
content. Life insurance executives, for example, have already objected to
the idea, proposed by some geneticists, that companies should banned from
discriminating against known carriers of genetic disease.
The need for legislation will become all the greater if genetic screening -
voluntary in today's experimental programmes - eventually becomes
compulsory.
'In the long run,' said Baroness Warnock, the moral philosopher who chaired
the highly influential Committee of Inquiry into Human Fertilisation, 'it
seems to me inevitable that everyone will be obliged to submit to at least
some compulsory screening.'
Genetic testing will become much more appealing as researchers discover how
to correct the defects discovered. Gene therapy, which has been pioneered in
the US, involves introducing non-defective genes into particular cells to
replace the ones carrying the disease.
The first patient was a four-year-old American girl, who had to be kept
apart from other children because one defective gene in her immune system
meant that she had no natural protection against infection. In September
1990 she was given a transfusion of about a billion of her own blood cells,
to which copies of the correct gene had been added. Her immune defences are
now strong enough for her to attend school.
Since then half a dozen other gene therapy studies have got under way in the
US, and European researchers expect to launch their own trials. Last month
the UK government's Committee on the Ethics of Gene Therapy, chaired by Sir
Cecil Clothier, the distinguished lawyer, recommended approval for gene
therapy trials.
Cystic fibrosis is one of the most important targets for gene therapy
research on both sides of the Atlantic, and animal tests of potential
treatments are already under way. Scientists at the US National Institutes
of Health have used a genetically altered virus to carry correctly
functioning copies of the CFTR gene - which is defective in cystic fibrosis
patients - into the lungs of laboratory rats. If the technique works in
monkeys, too, trials of human gene therapy for cystic fibrosis could start
as soon as 1993.
All these experiments involve 'somatic gene therapy.' This corrects the
defect by adding new genes to the cells where they are needed - for example,
in the bone marrow or lungs - but the genetic change is not passed on to the
patient's offspring. 'There is widespread agreement,' said Lady Warnock,
'that such therapy is not open to moral objection.' Indeed, Sir Cecil
Clothier says that none of the religious groups - Christian, Moslem and
Jewish - giving evidence to his committee objected to somatic gene therapy.
But 'germ line gene therapy', which would affect future generations, is
generally regarded today as medically unpredictable and ethically
unacceptable. It is unlikely to be approved anywhere in the world, at least
for a few years.
An experimental procedure equivalent to germ line therapy is used to make
'transgenic' animals - for example, sheep which produce valuable human
proteins in their milk. But the technique, which involves injecting genes
into newly fertilised embryos, is too crude for use in humans. There is no
way of controlling how many copies of the new genes are taken up, nor of
directing where they are incorporated in the embryo's existing genetic
material.
However, if scientists develop a more precise technique for eliminating a
defective gene and replacing it with a correct copy, then germ line gene
therapy will seem irresistible. If, for example, it became possible safely
to eradicate cystic fibrosis for ever, it would seem absurd to screen each
generation for the defective gene.
The question then is whether we would have taken the first step down a
slippery slope, leading eventually from eradication of inherited diseases to
genetic enhancement of sought-after traits such as intelligence, beauty and
athletic prowess. Improving mankind may seem an enticing prospect. But as
Lady Warnock said: 'We all fear, and not without reason, that one day such
power might be exercised not by benevolent doctors but by political tyrants
who would use us for their own ends.'
