
CHINA yesterday launched a blistering attack against the governor of Hong
Kong, Mr Chris Patten, accusing him of challenging Chinese sovereignty and
of seeking to perpetuate the division of the Chinese people.
An angry editorial in the communist party newspaper, People's Daily, said Mr
Patten met with a senior official of Taiwan's ruling Nationalist party, Mr
Xu Shengfa,for a political purpose on November 3. The meeting was held in
Government House where Mr Patten 'openly offered flattery and favours'.
The governor had tried to cover this up by claiming through an aide the
meeting was with members of a Taiwanese business delegation for commercial
reasons only, the paper said.
But on November 9 the manager of China Travel Service, Mr Li Changyi,
disclosed the governor's guest was a member of the Taiwanese Nationalist
Party's central standing committee. The editorial said the meeting was
greeted by Taiwanese newspapers as a break with precedent which opened new
top level channels of communication between Hong Kong and Taiwan.
China regards Taiwan as a breakaway province. Although much of Taiwan's
enormous trade with the mainland is routed through Hong Kong because Taiwan
bans direct trade, the colony's leaders have in the past been careful to
avoid offending the Chinese by officially receiving Taiwanese politicians.
Taiwanese officials have often been denied entry to the colony.
The People's Daily editorial said: 'Patten's 'break with precedence' is
obviously a challenge to Chinese sovereignty.'
Mr Patten wanted to make Hong Kong an 'independent or semi-independent or
self-governing political entity' to continue British colonial rule.
There was no difference between Patten's policies and the aims of some
Taiwanese who advocated independence for Taiwan.
China kept up the pressure over Hong Kong yesterday by repeating its refusal
to support any attempt by the British authorities to proceed unilaterally
with the construction of the multi-billion dollar airport.
Talks in Beijing in July failed to reach agreement on financing the new
airport, the official Xinhua news agency reported. It quoted an unnamed
Chinese spokesman for the Sino-British Joint Liaison Group who said the
British had rejected as too risky a Chinese proposal made in July for the
urgent work of site reclamation for the airport to proceed pending an
agreement on overall financial arrangements.
The spokesman said the British side was now going back on its words and
using the suggestion of the Chinese side as an excuse to proceed alone.
The circumstances were now different, the spokesman said, and China opposed
any decision of the British to go it alone on the airport.
The escalating row between Beijing and the British authorities in Hong Kong
has become dangerously heated since China's angry rejection of Mr Patten's
plan to expand Hong Kong's 1995 elections, saying they violated Hong Kong's
post-1997 constitution.
Each day produces a more furious Chinese response. On Saturday the governor
was accused of stepping up the row and told political changes not approved
by China would have no future after 1997.
The entry of Taiwan into the argument adds a further explosive element to an
already volatile situation.
