
EUROPE'S national aid budgets could eventually be pooled as part of a common
foreign trade policy, according to officials in Brussels. This long-term
objective has emerged as efforts gather pace to lay common ground rules
across the European Community for tied aid and export credit terms to
developing countries.
The EC has in the past year set up two working parties intended to prepare
reports on eventual harmonisation of export finance practices among member
states. It has also worked closely with the Paris-based Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) on limiting how tied aid can be
mixed with commercial credits to win contracts in the developing world.
Since February 15, such aid can only be mixed in projects that are not
commercially viable, and in the poorest of developing countries.
Country by country, exporters complain that cheap export credit insurance,
and the practice of mixing aid with commercial loans, are used by
competitors to snatch contracts.
The possibility of pooling aid funds is the longest-term aim of one of the
two working parties - that headed by an official seconded from Coface,
France's leading export credit agency. This group is concentrating on
'non-marketable risk' - export finance that cannot be commercially
supported, because the project has a life of more than three years, or
because it is in a poor or volatile country where the danger of default is
high.
The first aim of the group is to harmonise 'technical ground conditions' for
providing export credit cover. This will include getting export credit
agencies to agree on the percentage of the value of a contract they will
insure, what kinds of risk they will insure, and for how many years cover
will be provided.
The second aim will be to harmonise export credit insurance premium rates.
Stage three will aim to establish a 'common cover policy', under which
governments agree on what risk category different export markets fall into,
adjusting premium rates accordingly. At present, many governments tinker
with rates as part of their foreign or defence policies, pointing cheap
credits at allies regardless of commercial risk.
'If the Maastricht Treaty (on European union) is completed, then it should
make it easier to reach a common foreign trade policy,' an EC official said.
With this, and a 'common cover policy' for developing countries in place, it
would be a comparatively small step to pooling national aid funds centrally
in the EC. Exporters from across the EC could then tap the common aid pool,
regardless of which country is sponsoring a project.
'It would be too idealistic to over-estimate the speed of progress that is
possible,' an official said. 'We have to move forward cautiously.'
