
AUSTRALIA MOVED quickly yesterday to defuse a potential row with New Zealand
over the status of thousands of New Zealand sheep shearers whose presence
has caused mounting tension in the wool industry.
Senator Gareth Evans, the foreign minister, said Canberra would resist
growing demands for the imposition of work permits, which would undermine
progress towards the integration of the New Zealand and Australian
economies. He told Mr Don McKinnon, his New Zealand counterpart, that the
government was determined to maintain freedom of travel and employment
between the two countries, which has existed since the 1920s.
Reciprocal employment rights are not included in the Closer Economic
Relations treaty between the two countries, which is designed to create
bilateral free trade in goods and services. However, the Australian
government is aware that any diminution of travel and employment rights
would be resisted by New Zealand, and could damage further progress towards
the creation of a joint economy.
The dispute blew up on Tuesday when the ruling Labor Party's backbench MPs
and Senators called for restrictions on the freedom of New Zealand shearers
to work in Australia. The call followed a report from Labor's backbench
immigration committee recommending limits on settlement rights for New
Zealanders, who now constitute one of Australia's largest immigrant
communities.
Unease over New Zealand immigration has been simmering for some time
following a big increase in settlement since the mid-1980s.
The Australian Workers' Union, which represents shearers, claims the New
Zealanders undercut established wages by avoiding tax and failing to
register with regulatory authorities. The union claims that about 42 per
cent of the Australian wool clip is now shorn by New Zealanders, and that
more than half of Australian shearers are out of work.
Officials say violence has already broken out in some of the remote rural
communities where the shearing is carried out, and warn of more serious
clashes unless New Zealand access is restricted.
