
Shostakovich's fourth symphony (Op. 43) is one of his biggest and most
brazen - the modernist excursion of 1936 which he did not dare have
performed once Stalin had condemned the 1932 opera Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk
for formalism, and which was succeeded by 'the Soviet Artist's Practical
Creative Reply to Just Criticism' in the form of the world-beating fifth
symphony. It was not until 1961 that it was deemed safe in the USSR to give
the fourth its premiere; and experiencing the cataclysmic climaxes, grinding
dissonances and moments of pure weirdness in Jeffrey Tate's splendid account
of the work with the London Symphony Orchestra on Sunday night one could
hear why.
It is a huge structure - a central quasi-scherzo flanked by movements
lasting each some 25 minutes - scored for a huge orchestra and dealing in
bold ideas. As if anticipating Penderecki's early manner, Shostakovich
creates a dialectic of sheer sonority. The presto fugal passage for the
strings in the first movement generates a sonorous energy that goes far
beyond the needs of any conventional thematic argument - or it did in the
LSO's rendering at any rate. Likewise, the thick chorus of woodwinds early
in the second movement began to conjure up the music of Ligeti; while the
outbreak of dry ironic percussion, dominated by unlikely castanets, with
which the movement comes to its sudden stop evoked for all the world the
later loopier Tippett.
Tate well brought out this movement's strange quality of tragic insouciance,
and elsewhere, variously, the bitter-sweet naughtiness of fugues and
waltzes, the painful stridency, the note of desolation, and all the
characteristic expressive elements which no criticism ever compelled
Shostakovich to alter. The climaxes were admirably judged, even if the last
of them taxed the Barbican's acoustics. Admirable too were the numerous
solos for instruments or sections: Ian Bousfield's trombone, Martin Gatt's
bassoon, the piccolo section, the two frenetic timpanists, the
celesta-player who inscrutably signs the work off.
Gatt and three of his fellow principals composed the solo quartet in
Mozart's Sinfonia Concertante in E flat, K. 297b, for oboe (Roy Carter),
clarinet (Andrew Marriner), horn (Hugh Seenan) and bassoon which filled the
first half. A work of doubtful authenticity, it rarely fails to make a
tedious impression, but the stylish virtuosity of these players did much to
sustain interest.
