
Bill Hooley, who, in January last year signed a three-year, Pounds
71,500-a-year contract as managing director of Butte Mining, a London-listed
company, has resigned.
The announcement about his departure follows news last week that Butte,
which has not made a profit since it was floated five years ago and has a
present market value of about Pounds 5m, had started a legal action in the
US claiming Dollars 325m damages.
Butte has been advised to conserve its resources to ensure it has the cash
to fight the legal battle and has therefore decided to halt temporarily its
exploration and mine development operations. 'Bill is a mining engineer and
he prefers digging holes in the ground. He feels he is an overhead we don't
need,' says a spokesman. No replacement managing director will be recruited.
The cash conservation effort has also seen David Lloyd-
Jacob, the executive chairman, agree to take only half the Pounds 100,000 a
year guaranteed by his three-year contract.
Hooley will work for Butte four days a week as a consultant in Australia
where he went after it took over two small companies there. Previously he
had worked with Dallhold Resources.
*****
MIKE OTTY was taking something of a leap into the unknown when he decided to
move from trying to set up an electronic rival to Glass's Guide, the UK
motor trade's used car price 'Bible', to taking a job with Al Habtoor, a
Dubai-headquartered conglomerate active throughout the Gulf.
That was nine years ago, and not long after he had parted company with car
maker Peugeot Talbot as its sales operations director in the UK.
Dubai had seemed a sunnier prospect in more ways than one, as the UK motor
trade and industry continued a long struggle to emerge from its early 1980s
recession.
Initially, Otty signed up to help Al Habtoor increase its network of motor
distribution businesses in the Emirates, and which now include such
illustrious names as Rolls-Royce.  But although making the leap, Otty was
destined to land firmly on his feet: this month he was appointed a group
managing director under chairman Khalaf Al Habtoor.
From now on, vehicles will form only a part of his remit.
The others include construction, hotels, trading - and even marble and
perfume.
