
MR Erik Penser, the Swedish financier forced to relinquish his shareholding
in the chemicals group Nobel Industries last August, looks set to stage a
SKr5bn (Dollars 829m) bid for his former interests.
This follows the announcement yesterday that Mr Penser had settled his
differences with Nordbanken, the Swedish bank which currently controls Nobel
Industries.
Mr Penser was forced to hand over his 70 per cent stake in Nobel Industries
to state-controlled Nordbanken after the collapse of Gamlestaden, a finance
company controlled by Nobel.
Gamlestaden suffered large credit losses in the property sector.
From the outset Mr Penser maintained that Nordbanken was wrong to seize his
shares in Nobel Industries, a company which he had built up over several
years, as collateral and that he was prepared to repay his debts to the
Swedish banks.
According to the agreement reached yesterday between Nordbanken and Mr
Penser, the Swedish financier has regained ownership of Yggdrasil, his
former holding company for a token SKr1. Yggdrasil owns shares in a handful
of small developing companies.
Nordbanken also said it would welcome a bid from Mr Penser for the 70 per
cent stake in Nobel Industries, which currently has a stock market
capitalisation of about SKr7bn.
Mr Penser said he would 'let the dust settle a bit' before announcing his
immediate plans, but indicated that he was keen to buy back his Nobel
Industries shares, which were valued at SKr5bn.
He added that several international institutions had indicated that they
would help him to finance the acquisition. As part of the deal, Mr Penser
has withdrawn his SKr3.8bn legal action against Nordbanken.
Posing for the cameras yesterday with a formal handshake, Mr Penser and Mr
Bjorn Wahlstrom, the chairman of Nordbanken, claimed that they had patched
up their differences over the affair.
Nordbanken has been strongly criticised for its conduct towards Nobel
Industries. However, Mr Wahlstrom yesterday denied that Nordbanken's conduct
was improper, saying that both parties had been keen to find a solution to
the problem.
