
GROWTH in Germany's broad money supply accelerated again last month,
breaching 10 per cent for the first time since the M3 target was introduced
in 1988 and adding to the widespread conviction that the Bundesbank will not
cut interest rates when its policy-making council meets on Thursday.
However, there was speculation yesterday that the Bundesbank could today
make a small symbolic cut in its securities repurchase rate, by which it
provides short-term liquidity to the banks.
Provisional figures showed that M3 money supply climbed by 10.2 per cent in
October, on a seasonally adjusted annualised basis, far higher than the
Bundesbank's target range of 3.5 to 5.5 per cent.
This compares to 9.3 per cent in September and 8.8 per cent in August.
'The latest data will do little to foster the impression that monetary
policy is about to ease, a situation which will undoubtedly put further
pressure on the EMS,' commented Mr Richard Reid, chief economist at
Schweizerische Bankgesellschaft (Deutschland) in Frankfurt.
The Bundesbank said the main reason for the ballooning M3 growth in October
was the especially large inflow of foreign capital during the second half of
September. This reflected central banks' massive currency interventions
during September's crisis in the European exchange rate mechanism.
Economists said it had already been clear that the effects of intervention
in September had not been fully reflected in that month's M3 number.
They were discouraged however by the continuing strong demand for credit,
which has climbed by 9 per cent on a seasonally adjusted basis over the last
six months.
The Bundesbank blamed this on demand for short- and long-term credits which
led to a DM21bn (Pounds 8.6bn) increase in bank credits to businesses and
individuals in October, compared to an increase of DM17bn in September.
The Bundesbank has since the late summer sought to play down the temporary
importance of growth in broad money, which includes cash, current accounts
and short-term deposits. For some months now it has been obvious that the M3
target for the year could not be met.
It has argued that it has been distorted by special factors such as currency
market intervention and the effect of the inverse yield curve, where
short-term interest rates have been higher than long-term rates,
discouraging long-term saving and helping to boost short-term deposits.
However on Monday night Mr Johann Gaddum, a member of the Bundesbank
council, argued that the excess growth in money supply could not simply be
'argued away'. He emphasised that inflation, running at 3.7 per cent a year,
was unjustifiably high.
