
THE Taiwanese National Assembly faces a week-long boycott by opposition
delegates as the latest sign of growing discord on the island about whether
to move to a directly elected presidency - a debate which itself is
symptomatic of uncertainty about Taiwan's broader constitutional future.
Opposition deputies walked out yesterday after disrupting a speech by Mr Hau
Pei-tsun, the prime minister, and challenging his right to address the
assembly.
But conservative delegates of the ruling KMT party say they will try to keep
the topic off the National Assembly's agenda altogether in the session which
opened last month, arguing that there are still four years left until the
end of President Lee Teng-Hui's term.
The main opposition Democratic Progressive party (DPP), which holds 75 of
the 403 assembly seats, has already called for island-wide demonstrations on
April 19. The DPP supports a directly elected president, but of an
independent Republic of Taiwan. This is anathema to the KMT government,
which still claims sovereignty over the whole of China, although Taiwan has
operated as an independent state since 1949.
The debate, which is over whether to allow the president to be elected by
the Taiwanese people rather than by electoral college, was apparently
initiated in early March by President Lee himself within the KMT leadership,
and erupted into a public row during the party's central committee plenum.
Until now, the president has been elected by the National Assembly, which is
also charged with amending the constitution, a relic from the days of KMT
rule on the mainland before it fled to Taiwan in 1949 after losing the war
with the communists. Taiwan has a separate parliament, the Legislative Yuan.
Mr Chen Pi-chao, of the independent Institute for National Policy Research,
says that the presidency issue is symptomatic of a power struggle which has
been endemic in the KMT leadership ever since Taiwan-born President Lee, who
is also chairman of the KMT, broke the mainlanders' monopoly on power when
he was elected two years ago.
Ranged on one side are Mr Lee's supporters, the liberal mainstream faction,
most of whom are native Taiwanese and who favour direct presidential
elections. They have public opinion and most regional assemblies behind
them. On the other side is the conservative faction, mostly of mainland
origin, supporters of the prime minister, who has close connections with the
military.
Opinion polls earlier this year showed that a majority of Taiwanese favoured
direct election of the president, if only because it was simpler than other
methods.
Other political analysts are concerned that such an election would bring a
presidential system, in which too much power resides in one person. 'That
kind of system is not conducive to the stability of a developing country,'
says Professor Hu Fu of National Taiwan University. 'It's too easy for it to
turn into a personality cult like the Marcos regime in the Philippines.'
Conservatives in the KMT also argue that direct election of a Taiwanese
president would be a step closer to formal independence, and therefore
unacceptable to Beijing, which has threatened military intervention should
the island declare itself independent.
