
FACTORING has increased in popularity around the world as a means of
financing and managing export business in recent years.
Worldwide export factoring business rose by 14 per cent in 1991 compared
with an increase of just 9 per cent in domestic factoring, according to
Factors Chain International, a network of factoring companies. This was the
fifth year running that export factoring growth had exceeded that of
domestic factoring.
And there are hopes in the industry that 1992 and the formation of a single
European market, will increase demand for export factoring which allows open
account trading with foreign customers.
In spite of this trend export factoring remains only a small part of the
world total of factoring business. It amounted to only six per cent of total
factoring volume of Dollars 266bn in 1991.
Factoring has not made great headway against more established methods of
arranging export finance such as the use of letters of credit and
forfaiting, which provides for the discounting of trade bills.
It plays an important role in financing exports in Germany, Belgium and the
Netherlands, three of the leading export factoring countries, where it
amounts to about 30 per cent of total factoring volume.
But its role in other countries such as Italy and Japan, where domestic
factoring is relatively strong, is minimal.
In the UK, export factoring declined by 2.8 per cent to Pounds 601m in 1991,
in line with the decline in domestic factoring, and now accounts for just 4
per cent of total factoring volumes.
The UK factors attribute their relative lack of success in developing export
business to the important role large companies play in the country's
exports. The smaller businesses which are the factoring industry's natural
clients are not strong exporters, said Mr David Richardson, senior marketing
manager at International Factors.
Many companies have traditionally arranged export insurance cover through
the Export Credits Guarantee Department.
The sale of the ECGD's short-term export credit department to NCM of the
Netherlands may push up rates to more commercial levels and increase the
attractions of factoring finance, according to Mr Alan Hughes, managing
director of Griffin Factors.
Export factoring has also been held back by gaps in the international
networks of factoring companies.
Export factors require links with partners in export destinations to be able
to guarantee local coverage. It is the import factor who has the local
knowledge to carry out credit checks and chase invoices.
These networks have been expanding in recent years and gaps in eastern
Europe and the Far East have been plugged. South America and Africa, areas
with serious payments problems, are still to a large extent blanks on the
factoring map, however.
In spite of these limitations the failure of export factoring to make faster
progress remains something of a puzzle to the factoring industry.
All the benefits of domestic factoring apply even more strongly to export
business, where companies are even less likely to know their foreign
customers and where currency exchange rates, language and cultural
differences combine to complicate trade.
