
THE FRENCH car industry is emerging from recession stronger and more
competitive than before.
It still has some way to go before it can match Japanese levels of
productivity, the ultimate target in the minds of the managements of both
Peugeot and state-owned Renault. Yet the strides they have made are
enormous.
A decade ago, Peugeot and state-owned Renault were on the brink of
bankruptcy. Now they are in relatively good health, in spite of having
suffered a two-year decline in their main European markets.
Last year, for example, Peugeot maintains it produced the highest net
margins of any car maker in the world, even after having suffered a 40 per
cent decline in net earnings. Mr Jacques Calvet, the group's chairman,
reckons the market will pick up this year. Renault, once one of the public
sector's heaviest loss makers, reported well over doubled net profits last
year, and is proceeding so successfully with its alliance with Volvo that
both partners talk of a possible merger.
Like their international competitors, French car makers have had to make
heavy workforce reductions, down by 25 per cent over the past five years at
Renault and down by 5 per cent over the same period at Peugeot, which was
less overmanned than its public sector rival. Much more is to come,
according to a recent study by the planning commission, which estimates that
the French car industry must trim its workforce by another 2.5 per cent
annually until the end of the decade to become fully competitive.
Peugeot and Renault have also overhauled factory organisation, introduced
just-in-time-stock control, Japanese-style production teams, reorganised
their design departments, and - more at Renault than Peugeot - modernised
their product ranges.
Peugeot reckons to have improved the number of cars made per man by 50 per
cent over the past five years, while Renault says it has improved its
productivity by 6 per cent to 7 per cent per year over the same period. Both
aim at least to repeat that improvement by the end of the decade.
This leaves French car industry's productivity just 10 per cent behind that
of Japanese car producers in Britain, itself 10 per cent behind the Japanese
in Japan, according to a study by consultants McKinsey for the European
Commission.
French car production has also become more efficient. The average Renault
plant is now fully operational 70 per cent of the time, while Peugeot
Renault even manages 75 per cent; a big improvement over recent years, but
still behind the 85 per cent in Japan.
Of course, getting this far has not been easy, and there are still handicaps
to be overcome.
For example, Renault and Peugeot both invested heavily in automated
production lines in the mid-1980s. Yet they have since had to retreat
slightly, re-introducing more labour and simpler machines to the shopfloor,
because the robots proved complicated to maintain and sometimes unreliable.
Tighter stock control has saved financial charges for both of them. Yet the
extent to which just-in-time stock control depends on Japanese style labour
stability was sharply underlined by a strike at Renault's main engine and
gearbox plant, which took just 10 days to bring the group's entire French
and Belgian car production to a halt.
The other big shortcoming they have yet to tackle is an ageing and
relatively untrained workforce. The average age of workers at one of
Renault's main plants at Flins, near Paris, is 45 as against 28 at Nissan
UK, according to the planning commission study. In 1989, nearly half of
French the car industry's workforce had no professional diploma. Renault is
accordingly pushing for European Community and government aid for
retraining.
There has, however, been measurable progress in several areas.
Quality control. Peugeot has abandoned the old style of quality control,
whereby faults are identified and corrected in an enormous car park at the
end of the production line. Now the lines are divided into sections, each
managed by an autonomous team, which is responsible for correcting its own
faults as the unfinished car passes through.
As a result, Peugeot has over the past five years closed all its refinishing
shops. Renault is moving over to the same system and aims to close all its
refinishing departments within four years.
Components. Renault and Peugeot are getting less integrated and becoming
primarily designers and assemblers. This is another way of cutting costs to
the bone, but also reflects the fact that neither wants to become involved
in the increasing electronic and specialised componentry found in modern
cars, such as anti-lock brakes or catalytic converters. This leaves their
hands free to concentrate on key mechanical components such as automatic
gearboxes, where the pair are considering joint production.
Accordingly, the proportion of bought-in components has risen steeply in
recent years to just over 60 per cent of operating total costs at Peugeot
and 67 per cent at Renault. They have both been selling some of their
component businesses or seeking export partners, as in Renault's disposal of
a stake in its steering systems subsidiary to a power steering offshoot of
Toyota. Renault has now told its component buyers to put in house and
external suppliers on exactly the same footing when deciding where to buy.
If they have become more dependent on outside component producers, France's
car makers have also been applying more pressure to keep suppliers up to the
mark. Peugeot and Renault have for the past five years been running joint
audits on component suppliers' quality, grading them according to ability to
do their own quality control and at the same time reducing the number of
suppliers with which they do business directly.
They are thinking of extending this system to cover suppliers' productivity
and costs too. Meanwhile, Renault says it has achieved substantial costs
savings by pooling much of its component buying activities with Volvo.
Design management. Another part of the race to catch up with Japan is the
time and investment taken to design and launch new cars. Here, Peugeot
estimates that the Japanese still have a substantial advance, capable of
launching a new model for around FFr3-4bn in three years, as against the
French average of FFr6bn to FFr8bn in four to five years. These comparisons
are, of course, rough since there is no standard measure for the starting
point of a new design.
Nevertheless, Renault and Peugeot reckon they are catching up. Both
companies have in the past three years started setting up project teams, so
that all departments involved in a new car launch work together
simultaneously. Formerly, new cars were designed by a production line-type
organisation, with the blueprint passing from the design department through
engineering and production management. The time taken to design and launch
Renault's soon to be unveiled small car, code-named the X06, was in line
with Japanese experience, says Mr Philippe Gras, deputy chief executive. On
average, Renault aims to produce a new model in just under four years, down
from the previous norm of nearly five years.
Peugeot last year placed the design teams of its two sister companies under
a single management to help them work faster and expects to produce the
first concrete results from 1994.
The French car industry's progress invites the question of whether Peugeot's
continued calls for protection against Japanese competition - not,
incidentally, echoed by Renault - should be taken seriously. Last summer's
EC-Japan car import agreement allows the Community to set controls on
Japanese car sales until the end of the decade - so what can there be to
fear?
Peugeot's answer is clear. Japanese cars should not be allowed free access
to the EC until Tokyo allows the Europeans the same market share in Japan as
the Japanese have in Europe. As Mr Calvet argued in a recent article in the
FT, the deal was an example of how Europe has 'unilaterally disarmed without
anything in exchange'. The next few years will show whether Mr Calvet and
his colleagues can create the weapons to fight back.
