
AMERICAN EXPRESS, the large US financial services company that has been
buffeted by credit card losses, is hoping to raise up to Dollars 1bn (Pounds
564m) by means of a public share offering of as much as 45 per cent of First
Data Corporation (FDC), its renamed credit card processing subsidiary.
The share offer, which would leave American Express owning 55 per cent to 65
per cent of the business, would represent the largest fund-raising exercise
in years for American Express.
It would represent the sale of shares in one of its five strategic core
businesses; the others are the Shearson Lehman investment bank, the travel
related services business, the American Express bank and the IDS financial
services business.
FDC, formerly known as American Express's Information Services Corporation,
is the largest third-party processor of credit cards in the US and in
Britain.
The company's revenues rose 20 per cent in 1991, to Dollars 994.5m, thanks
mainly to a first-time five-month contribution from Signet, the
Basildon-based UK credit card processor that American Express bought last
year from a consortium made up of Midland Bank, National Westminster Bank,
Royal Bank of Scotland and Lloyds Bank.
American Express paid Pounds 146m for Signet, which is the largest
third-party credit card processor in Europe.
FDC had net profits of Dollars 118m in 1991, but Signet's contribution to
the bottom line is understood to have been marginal.
FDC has 17,000 employees and last year represented about 15 per cent of the
Dollars 789m in group net earnings at American Express.
Mr Jim Robinson, chairman of American Express, said the share offer, which
has yet to be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), would
raise substantial funds that would be available 'at a time when a strong
capital base is especially important for financial services compan-ies'.
Last autumn American Express shocked Wall Street when it took a Dollars 265m
charge against earnings, including Dollars 155m to cover credit losses that
were mainly at its Optima credit card division.
American Express's total long-term debt is Dollars 13.1bn, or nearly twice
its shareholders' equity of Dollars 7.4bn.
