
ETCHED on every ambitious gardener's mind is the image of white flowers, set
against dark green hedges and shown off in the cool of a summer evening. No
doubt it has been deeply etched on those of you trapped in a freak European
summer, where the swimming-pools turned green, the children nearly
suffocated, and the railway lines melted in the extreme Italian heat. Back
in England, the railway lines have other problems; swimming-pools will be
swimming-pools, but the gales and sudden coldness have not wiped out the
image of pale flowers as the garden turns peacefully towards autumn. White
gardens now stretch far beyond their famous model at Sissinghurst Castle. It
takes skill to keep the white flag flying in September and, personally, I
relish the challenge.
By early autumn, white flowers are widely believed to have gone into
retreat. White corners are a tangle of old campanulas; white roses are out
of season; and the white flowers on the giant crambe have vanished, leaving
a mass of leaves like yellow cabbage. The best white flowers are not a soft
colour which needs to be segregated. They can easily compete with yellows,
deep blues, and especially strong reds. I would rather use them at intervals
round a small garden, especially in the darker setting of a back garden in
the city: they are more impressive if they are not isolated.
This year, any expatriate would pine for some of our Japanese anemones,
which are flowering madly after a summer with so much late rain. They ought
to be a town gardener's first choice for a welcome home after the summer
holiday. They will put up with dry shade and life in a narrow bed below a
London wall. They need a few years to give of their best and should never be
judged by their first two seasons' performance. I have compared the
varieties carefully and I am convinced that it is worth paying more for the
white form with the biggest single flowers. Geante des Blanches is its true
name, although this lady giant sometimes turns up as White Queen. I see no
particular merit in the double forms. The single whites are a godsend and,
after a few years without disturbance, they spread prettily.
Below them, at a lower height, I recommend the Gaura lindheimeri, which I
have grown to maturity in its second year from a seed packet. Probably, it
ought to be tied to a stake, but I have let my young plants fall with their
white flowers sideways, like a graceful form of willow herb. Anemones hold
themselves upright, but Gauras throw themselves around very prettily. One
danger is that a hard winter will kill them off.
At intervals beyond these two fine plants, you need spires and spikes of
white. The spires are best found on the tall veronica virginica, which has
been hidden from most of us under the new name of Veronicastrum. The spikes
are best on the Cimicifugas, whose flowers are like white bottle-brushes and
whose stems develop best in a semi-shaded bed which is not too dry. These
plants have the great advantage of being tall, up to five feet in good
conditions: neither of them is gleaming white, but they have a style which
is still under-exploited.
Beyond these leafy border plants, you need white shrubs with density and a
higher volume of flower. The robust white tree mallow, Lavatera Barnsley, is
an obvious choice nowadays wherever the garden can run slightly out of
control. Hardy white fuchsias are another possibility, often forgotten for
their ability to put up with shade. White hydrangeas are more obvious and
particularly handsome in this wet year: the best of the hardy forms is still
Mme E. Mouilliere, although the more subtle style of the Lacecap varieties
is superior.
This year, I have a new favourite, always listed but seldom seen in
thoughtful plantings, perhaps because it seems too obvious. The
white-flowered Obedient Plant is five times as good as its purple-pink
sister: its dark green leaves set off obedient stems of white flowers to a
height of about two feet. Its worst enemy is its name, Pysostegia Summer
Snow, but I like to alternate groups of it with the white Penstemon
Snowstorm, which took such a beating from its namesake last winter. At a
greater height behind them, you cannot beat the best of the phloxes, the
robust White Admiral, which flowers from July until late September, if you
remember to dead-head it. There is something special in this variety's pale
green leaf and breeding which gives it the vigour lacked by other phloxes in
the pale-colour range. Breeders ought to investigate it.
White flowers without scent would be a poor half-measure. Many people
complain that scent is almost unavailable later in the season, but they
forget their tobacco plants and are among the hundreds of gardeners who
overlook the easiest of white lilies, Lilium formosanum. If you sow seed of
this variety in January, it really will flower in the first year of its
life. It is extremely easy and is best managed if you pot it on by stages
into six or seven inch pots. In late June, they can be let into gaps left by
early varieties. Next week, they will join the last of the white tobacco
plants and will spread a strong scent through the chill of early autumn
evenings. Many town gardeners cram the lovely regale lily into pots for
July, but forget to do anything about this lovely sequel, a lily which is
happy on any good garden soil.
Lastly, I would play around with autumn crocuses. The blue varieties are
well-known, but I have a weakness for the white-flowered Crocus speciosus
albus, which soon makes a good clump in any light soil. The flowers will be
showing in mid-September, but the leaves have to wait until next spring.
Like all strong whites, they make a big impression in small, dense groups.
The battle for colour is far from over, and it merely needs a touch of
cunning to keep the flags of white still flying until frost finally forces
us all to submit.
