
NOBEL Industries, the Swed-ish chemicals group, yesterday concluded
financial settlements with its banks and its former finance company
subsidiary after months of acrimonious wrangling.
Nobel said its shareholders' capital would be increased by SKr800m (Dollars
134.2m) after the agreement, the terms of which were welcomed by all of the
parties concerned.
The settlement freed Nobel and Nordbanken, the main bank involved, to draw a
clean slate and concentrate on their normal operations in future,
participants said.
Under the terms of the agreement, Nordbanken, the state-controlled bank
which owns 70 per cent of the shares in Nobel, will pay SKr560m to the
chemicals group. The payment would then allow Nobel to settle its
obligations towards Gamlestaden, the loss-laden finance company in which the
chemicals group had a 48 per cent stake.
Nobel has already paid SKr1.9bn to Gamlestaden and had received demands for
a further SKr723m in payments to the finance company. However, according to
yesterday's agreement, Nobel only has to pay a further SKr520m.
Furthermore, the deal relieves Nobel of any further financial responsibility
towards Gamlestaden.
When Gamlestaden collapsed last summer because of heavy losses in the real
estate sector, the financial troubles spread to Nobel, its main shareholder.
Nobel had made a loan guarantee to secure bank lending to Gamlestaden, and
was threatened with bankruptcy as Gamlestaden's credit losses mounted.
Gamlestaden has accumulated credit losses of SKr8bn and is now owned by a
consortium of banks.
Nobel, which was controlled by Mr Erik Penser, the Swedish financier, had to
be rescued last August by Nordbanken. The bank in turn took over Mr Penser's
70 per cent stake in Nobel, saying that he had failed to fulfil his loan
agreements.
The banks' conduct in the Nobel affair was subsequently criticised by an
independent report.
Although the banks refused to admit that they had behaved incorrectly, legal
advisers suggested the independent report had played a vital role in
encouraging yesterday's financial settlement between the banks and Nobel.
Nordbanken said that the banks had 'decided it would take too much time,
effort and money to carry on with this legal dispute.'
Last Friday, Mr Erik Penser agreed to withdraw his SKr3.8bn legal suit
against Nordbanken after the bank agreed to return Yggdrasil, his former
holding company, to him.
