
CHUO TRUST and Banking, a leading Japanese trust bank, has closed its Zurich
subsidiary in response to poor trading conditions, and will concentrate its
European activities in London and Brussels.
Chuo is the third Japanese financial company, after Ryoko Securities and
Yamatane Securities, to shut its Zurich office this year. Japanese bankers
in the city say more could follow in the next few months.
Analysts say this is the inevitable crunch following an excessive build-up
in the late 1980s which saw the number of Japanese banks and securities
companies with offices in Switzerland exceed 40.
At the time, Zurich became an extension of the Japanese capital market, with
Japanese banks and securities companies helping Japanese industrial
companies float Swiss franc bond issues, usually equity-related. Interest
and exchange rates were such that funds raised, when converted into yen,
were very cheap to the issuers, occasionally even resulting in negative
interest charges.
Japanese new issue activity in Swiss capital markets remains surprisingly
strong. According to Yamaichi Bank (Switzerland), a subsidiary of Yamaichi
Securities, the total value of Japanese new bond issues launched in
Switzerland so far this year is SFr5.9bn, (Dollars 4.79bn) - ahead of the
pace of the past two years.
However, competition for this business is fierce. In the past, the Zurich
offices of Japanese banks and securities companies were able to make good
profits broking Japanese securities or in private banking, but these
activities have faded following the bursting of the Japanese asset bubble.
According to one Japanese banker in Zurich, none of their fraternity is
profitable today. Mr Hideaki Takimoto, liquidator of Chuo Trust Finance
(Switzerland), said the office, which opened only a little over four years
ago, had reached break-even level but the outlook did not look promising.
A key factor in the group's decision was a deadline for non-banks in
Switzerland to convert themselves into banks by the end of this year. That
would involve bringing more capital into the Zurich subsidiary, which Chuo
and others would rather avoid.
However, with the creation of the single market in the European economic
area next year, Chuo's office in Brussels, which has a banking licence, will
be able to participate in syndicating Swiss bond issues.
