
FRANCE'S three car makers, Peugeot, Citroen and state-owned Renault, have
made big strides in productivity as they prepare to face the Japanese
challenge in a liberalised European Community market.
They have done so in the nick of time. For France's bilateral import quota
on Japanese cars, which has limited their penetration to around 3 per cent
of the domestic market for years, is due to go by the end of this year.
Already, the Japanese share of the French car market has been allowed to
creep up in anticipation, from 3.3 per cent of new registrations in 1990 to
4.1 per cent last year, according to the Comite des Constructeurs Francais
d'Automobiles. By 1998, Japanese imports to France could rise from last
year's 82,440 vehicles to around 317,000, or 11.1 per cent of the market,
according to the European Commission.
The French government appears resigned to opening the floodgates, made
inevitable by the 1990 EC-Japan car import agreement, under which the
Community market is to be fully liberalised over a seven-year transition
period to the end of 1999. Mr Jacques Calvet, the chairman of Peugeot, has
condemned the deal as an example of how Europe has 'unilaterally disarmed
without anything in exchange'.
Yet despite Mr Calvet's complaints, incidentally not echoed by his
counterparts at Renault, the government is preparing for a controlled
arrival of Japanese competition. One sign of this is its readiness to allow
Nissan to buy out its French dealership earlier this year, ending 10 years
of resistance to the deal.
Other Japanese producers are on the move. Fuji Heavy Industries was planning
to export Legacy saloons and estate cars to France at the end of September
and expects authorisation soon to import Subaru cars. Subaru France hopes to
sell 1,000 Fuji cars in the year to March 1993 from 25 new outlets. In June,
Suzuki made its first French export sales, though on a very small scale,
while Daihatsu is studying the possibility of exporting its Charade models
to France.
Only 10 years ago it was unthinkable that Peugeot and Renault could face
Japanese competition head-on. They were both on the brink of bankruptcy at
the time. Today, they have come through the recession leaner and more
efficient and made big improvements in quality.
Last year, for example, the Peugeot group, which includes Citroen, maintains
it produced the highest net margins of any car maker in the world, even
after having suffered a 40 per cent decline in net earnings. Renault,
reported well over doubled net profits last year, followed by a five-fold
rise in earnings in the first half of 1992 and is proceeding so successfully
with its alliance with Volvo that both partners talk of a possible merger.
Their payroll costs have fallen dramatically. Renault has cut its workforce
by 25 per cent over the past five years, while Peugeot, less overmannned
than its public sector rival, has managed a 5 per cent reduction over the
same period. The two groups have also successfully introduced just in time
stock control, Japanese style production teams in place of the old line
management system, reorganised their design departments, and modernised most
of their product ranges.
Peugeot reckons to have improved the number of cars made per man by 50 per
cent over the past five years, while Renault says it has improved its
productivity by 6 per cent to 7 per cent per year over the same period. Both
aim at least to repeat that improvement by the end of the decade.
Tighter stock control has saved financial charges for both of them. Yet the
extent to which just in time stock control depends on Japanese style labour
stability was sharply underlined by a strike at Renault's main engine and
gearbox plant last year, which took only 10 days to halt the group's entire
French and Belgian car production, starved of vital components.
The progress has come in the following main areas, where the French industry
has not hesitated to adapt techniques from the Japanese competition.
Quality control. Peugeot has abandoned the old style of quality control,
whereby faults are identified and corrected in an enormous car park at the
end of the production line. Now the lines are divided into sections, each
managed by an autonomous team, responsible for correcting its own faults as
the vehicle moves through. As a result, Peugeot has over the past five years
closed all its refinishing shops. Renault is moving over to the same system
and aims to close all its refinishing departments within four years.
Components. Renault and Peugeot are getting less integrated and becoming
primarily designers and assemblers. This is another way of cutting costs to
the bone, but also reflects the fact that neither wants to get involved in
the increasing electronic and specialised components found in modern cars.
As a result, the proportion of bought-in components has risen steeply in
recent years to just over 60 per cent of operating total costs at Peugeot
and 67 per cent at Renault. At the same time, they have set rigorous quality
controls on suppliers. Peugeot and Renault have for the past five years been
running joint audits on component suppliers' quality, and are thinking of
extending this system to cover suppliers' productivity and costs. Renault
has also achieved substantial cost savings by pooling much of its component
buying activities with Volvo.
Design management. Another part of the race to catch up with Japan is the
time and investment needed to design and launch new cars. Here Peugeot
estimates that the Japanese still have a substantial advantage, capable of
launching a new model for around FFr3-4bn in three years, as against the
French average of FFr6bn to FFr8bn in four to five years. These comparisons
are, of course, rough, since there is no standard measure for the starting
point of a new design.
The time taken to design and launch Renault's latest small car, the Twingo,
was in line with Japanese experience, says Mr Philippe Gras, deputy chief
executive. On average, Renault aims to produce a new model in just under
four years, down from the nearly five years that used to be the norm.
Peugeot last year placed the design teams of its two sister companies under
a single management to help them work faster and expects to produce the
first concrete results from 1994.
Even so, Renault and Peugeot have some way to go before they can meet
Japanese standards of productivity. The result of all these efforts is to
bring the French car industry's productivity to just 10 per cent behind that
of Japanese car producers in Britain, itself 10 per cent behind the Japanese
in Japan, according to a study by consultants McKinsey for the European
Commission.
