
MR James Baker has the reputation of being a political magician. If he pulls
President George Bush's re-election campaign out of its present troubles he
will be promoted into the miracle-worker class.
That the secretary of state is to return to the White House soon to take
charge of both the campaign and domestic policy is now 'a done deal,'
whatever Mr Baker's or others' protestations to the contrary. The move has
been expected for weeks; Mr Bush's substantial trailing of Governor Bill
Clinton, the Democratic nominee, has rendered inevitable a repeat of 1988,
when Mr Baker left the Treasury to manage the Bush effort when the then
vice-president was trailing in the polls, though by a narrower margin than
now.
Mr Baker is currently on a trip to the Middle East and Asia. The shift may
not be formally announced until after Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israel's new prime
minister, comes to Washington next month, a visit with domestic political
connotations just before the Republican party convention.
Mr Lawrence Eagleburger, Mr Baker's deputy, is likely to be appointed acting
secretary of state. Federal law permits the president up to 120 days to
nominate a permanent replacement, allowing him to avoid a potentially
difficult confirmation process in Congress before the November 3
presidential election.
Mr Clinton was quick to argue that transferring Mr Baker demonstrated the
limits of Mr Bush's commitment to an active foreign policy, at a time when
Israel's change of government opened new possibilities in the Middle East.
Mr Baker will come in over the heads of Mr Sam Skinner, the White House
chief of staff, and Mr Robert Teeter, titular campaign chairman and also an
old friend. Neither will object to being superseded.
He may bring with him some of his inner circle of advisers at the State
Department, including Ms Margaret Tutwiler, the spokeswoman, and Mr Robert
Zoellick, the counsellor who effectively takes charge of international
economic policy.
The toughest issue for the campaign lately has been whether to dump
Vice-President Dan Quayle from the Republican ticket. Mr Quayle, whose
selection by Mr Bush in 1988 did not meet Mr Baker's approval, is unpopular
except with party conservatives. One poll this week reported that 60 per
cent of those questioned would not mind if he were replaced.
But Mr Bush yesterday dismissed rumours that Mr Quayle might be dropped.
Asked by reporters if Mr Quayle's status was uncertain, Mr Bush responded:
'No, it's very certain.'
Replacing Mr Quayle would be tricky. If General Colin Powell, chairman of
the joint chiefs of staff and Gulf war hero, ran with Mr Bush it might be
easy to argue that ditching Mr Quayle was not an act of desperation. But Mr
Baker himself is thought to harbour presidential ambitions and might be
reluctant to advance the cause of potential rivals by promoting them to
number two on the ticket. They include Mr Dick Cheney, secretary of defence,
Senator Phil Gramm of Texas, and Governor Pete Wilson of California.
It is probable, therefore, that Mr Quayle will stay where he is, which could
help win back some of the conservative support that defected to Mr Ross
Perot, who ruled out a bid for the presidency last week.
The overriding task, in any case, is to transform Mr Bush into a candidate
in whom the country can have confidence for four more years. At present Mr
Clinton, full of confidence and ideas, is making all the running.
