
WORLD COMMODITY prices sank to 'an all-time low' in real terms last year,
according to the World Bank.
In its recently-published annual report the bank attributed this is bleak
news for the developing countries to a 'worldwide slowdown in economic
activity' - a trend which has only worsened this year. 'Economic
difficulties in the Soviet Union and in Central and Eastern Europe generally
tended to lower commodity prices - except for basic food stuffs,' the report
continued.
Although price indexes for cereals and fats were slightly higher than in
1990, beverage prices were down by 5.9 per cent and sugar prices fell by
28.5 per cent. In fact, coffee, cocoa and tea prices hit all-time lows in
inflation adjusted terms.
One of the World Bank's commodity specialists, Mr Takamasa Akiyama, said
worldwide recession had only a short and medium-term effect on the price
declines. Basically, the difficulty in commodity production is the vast
productivity increases of the producing countries.
There are a number of factors contributing to productivity increases, but
one of them is the World Bank itself, according to some of its critics,
including Mr Kevin Watkins, senior economist at Oxfam.
'The bank's structural adjustment programme has contributed to the chronic
price depression by encouraging production of commodities for world markets
which are already saturated,' Mr Watkins said.
It had pushed production, he said, on the ideological assumption that each
country must produce what it produced best according to its 'comparative
advantage' - whether or not there was too much of a commodity around. It
also wanted to help the developing countries repay their debts.
'Should World Bank lending be guided by the demand of the Western banks?
That is a question it ought to address,' Mr Watkins said.
The bank has long recognised the danger in backing overproduction, and it
has often tried to restrict such lending. Mr Watkins said, however, that he
doubted that the bank's country departments talked to each other about their
loans. As one example, he cited support of palm oil production in both
Malaysia and Indonesia, two huge suppliers whose output significantly
affects world price.
The bank said it tried to limit commodity loans to countries that did not
have investment alternatives or simply needed to improve their current
productive capacity. However, between 1983 and 1986 it approved 15 projects
that were expected to lead to increased coffee production.
Mr Akiyama said the bank had little choice but to help a country increase
its productivity lest it lose out to more efficient producers.
