
THE LAST five years has been an era of massive consolidation within Europe's
railway manufacturing industry. Large businesses have been swallowing up
their smaller rivals, with the electrical engineering companies - whose
products make up the high value components of trains and trams - driving the
deals.
To date, most railway procurement in Europe has been nationalistically
driven, but the advent of the single European market increases the scope for
cross-border deals.
Most of the large companies now think in European, or indeed global, terms.
Overshadowing the market now are two huge multinational groups,
Swedish-Swiss Asea Brown Boveri and Anglo-French GEC-Alsthom. These two have
built up extensive railway manufacturing portfolios including signalling as
well as traction; both have annual turnover of the order of Pounds 1bn.
ABB's Zurich plant is a significant producer of electrical equipment for
light rail vehicles, and the company has important manufacturing capacity in
Germany and Sweden - plus a stake in Brel, the former state-owned railway
workshops in Britain.
GEC-Alsthom is famed as builder of France's high-speed TGV, but it also made
the vehicles for the showpiece Grenoble tramway - and there are more such
cars under construction for a new light rail route in northern Paris.
Meanwhile, the British side of the consortium has been a driving force
behind the Manchester Metrolink project. The group owns factories in Spain
and Belgium and has a collaboration agreement with the railway arm of Fiat
in Italy.
Competing with these two multinationals are some large German companies.
Siemens, a long-standing supplier of electrical equipment, has been
expanding into mechanical engineering.
Three years ago it bought a majority holding in Dusseldorf-based Duewag, one
of the largest light rail vehicle builders in the world and a major
beneficiary of the light rail renaissance in North America.
Siemens has a foothold in the growing British market with a deal to build
the vehicles for the Sheffield Supertram project. It could also acquire
electrical equipment manufacturing capacity in this country: it has already
expressed an interest in the rail side of Hawker Siddeley, should BTR decide
to divest itself of this part of its recent purchase at some point in the
future.
Acquisitions
Recent acquisitions by Siemens include a 51 per cent stake in Skoda of
Czechoslovakia, a builder of electric locomotives which Siemens intends to
expand to build suburban and metro trains as well, and a minority holding in
SGP, one of the principal railway vehicle builders in Austria.
The railway activities of the Daimler-Benz empire have been consolidated
under the AEG-Westinghouse umbrella, a collaborative venture in which
Westinghouse of the US owns 19 per cent. This group makes airport
people-movers and also owns MAN-GHH of Nuremberg, which manufactures for the
light rail sector.
The third force in the German light rail market is Salzgitter-based Linke
Hofmann Busch, which made the original cars for the Docklands Light Railway
in London.
While the Americans virtually vacated the passenger railway manufacturing
field in their flight to the car in the 1960s and 1970s and now largely have
to rely on European and Japanese technology, the Canadians retain a stake in
the shape of Bombardier of Montreal.
This aerospace and railway conglomerate has been buying up European
manufacturing capacity and owns BN of Bruges, Belgium, an important supplier
in the light rail field; the company is building 70 new vehicles to the
Docklands Light Railway.
The Swiss, with their well-respected tramway operations, have niche
suppliers of vehicles, although high labour costs limit the opportunity for
exports.
Vehicle-builder Vevey has recently signed a collaborative agreement with
French electronics firm Matra, whose automatic mini-metro systems have won
acceptance in town centres such as Lille and in airport operations.
The Italians have gained a name for low-cost vehicle building; Breda has
built for a number of US cities, and Firema was sub-contracted by
GEC-Alsthom to build the vehicles for the Manchester Metrolink.
Subsidies from the Italian government lower export prices, but efforts to
spread the political dividend can raise costs; for instance the Manchester
order, amounting to just 26 vehicles, was spread over three factories.
An important contender in the low-cost field is CKD Tatra of Prague, which
it is reckoned has built one out of every three tramcars in the world,
thanks to the dominance of tramways in the former east bloc.
The introduction of dollar trading there has shattered that market, and
Tatra is now seeking to penetrate western Europe. It already has a car
undergoing trials on the Oslo tram system. Tatra has a new design of car due
to make its debut in Prague this spring.
This will interest many cities as much of its floor is at a low level, to
help boarding by elderly and disabled people - and the new vehicle thus
competes directly with low-floor designs produced by western European
builders.
Thanks to a huge new factory built in the last years of Communist rule and
low labour costs, the Czech company is able to offer attractive prices; it
is now seeking a joint venture with one of the western European majors to
gain access to new technology.
Conspicuous mainly by their absence are the Japanese. Their penetration of
the railway market has not been anything as pervasive as it has been in the
automotive field.
In the main European countries they have found it difficult to obtain a
foothold, although one recent success has been Kawasaki's contract to supply
bogies for the new trains for London's Central Line.
Japanese companies have had a greater presence in the US market, but this is
now threatened by a wave of protectionist sentiment.
In January, a contract with Sumitomo to construct cars for Los Angeles' new
Green Line was cancelled, and local politicians are now seeking to build
their own factory in Los Angeles to make the vehicles.
The author is editor of Urban Transport International.
