
The world's pharmaceutical companies are conducting a romance with mother
nature. Lured by the novel compounds that only nature can concoct,
established giants such as SmithKline Beecham, Merck and Glaxo, and a host
of small start-ups are scouring the world's forests for the next blockbuster
medicine.
Although drug discovery is always risky, many scientists believe there is a
good chance of finding interesting medicinal compounds in nature, especially
in the species-rich tropical rain forests.
Plants and other forms of life have historically been an important source of
medicines. Morphine is derived from opium, for example, and penicillin is a
fungal metabolite. Moreover, there are some 250,000 species of flowering
plants in the world, and only 1,100 of them have been investigated
thoroughly for their medicinal properties.
'You don't have to be a rocket scientist to figure out that you may find
something in the remaining 99.5 per cent,' said Michael Balick, director of
the Institute of Economic Botany at the New York Botanical Garden.
The field was given an enormous boost by taxol, a promising anticancer
compound derived from the bark of the Pacific yew tree, a conifer found in
the remaining virgin forests of the US's Pacific Northwest. Taxol is now
being tested against ovarian and breast cancers.
The US National Cancer Institute first discovered taxol in the 1960s but saw
its natural products program languish in the 1980s. The institute is now
screening thousands of plants, marine creatures and micro-organisms for
activity against human cancers.
Searching the world's plants for drugs became passe among researchers in the
last two decades as the molecular and computer-driven route to drug
synthesis eclipsed any other method of discovering medicines. Today, armed
with new techniques borrowed from biotechnology, companies can screen
thousands of chemical extracts from plants for activity against human
cancers and other diseases in a very short period.
'There is obviously a lot of renewed interest in this area,' said Randall
Johnson, director of biomolecular discovery at SmithKline Beecham's US
headquarters in Philadelphia. 'Every month interesting compounds from nature
are emerging from these new mechanism-based screens, and nature is proving
to be a very rich source of compounds that can combat human disease,' he
said.
In Europe, a product from the ginko tree, one of the oldest living trees,
called ginkolyte, is used extensively to promote blood flow. James
McChesney, director of the Research Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences at
the University of Mississippi estimates the compound generates as much as
Dollars 300m a year in sales in Europe.
SmithKline Beecham is now clinically testing a plant-derived drug called
topotecan as a treatment for ovarian cancer. The drug is an analog of
campotothecin, a compound extracted from trees in China and India.
Campotothecin was originally discovered by the National Cancer Institute in
the easy 1960s, but proved too toxic in cancer patients and was dropped from
the NCI's programme. SmithKline resurrected it a number of years later,
creating a water-soluble analog that was less toxic, said Johnson.
Glaxo too has an interest in campotothecin. The company is studying analogs
of the compound and it is searching for new plant medicines as part of a
research consortium with the University of Illinois in Chicago, one of the
leading academic centres involved in medicinal plants. 'We are not looking
so much at medicines from plants per se, but substances that can be
improved, modified and refined for a safe and effective drug,' said Rick
Sluder, a Glaxo spokesman.
Another promising product is artemisinin, an antimalarial drug originally
derived from a plant found in China and south-east Asia, according to
McChesney. 'The excitement is that the compound is effective for
drug-resistant malaria and is practically a miraculous drug for cerebral
malaria, a serious form of the disease,' he said.
So far, there are no obstacles to obtaining large quantities of the plant.
Artemesia annua, from which the compound is derived, is a 'worldwide
naturalised weed,' said McChesney. 'You could probably find it growing in a
vacant lot in New York City,' he said.
The controversy surrounding taxol has underscored the issue of supply.
Conservationists are worried that in the rush to extract taxol from the bark
of the Pacific yew tree, remaining stands of the tree will be obliterated.
However, McChesney said researchers have now found that taxol can be
extracted from the yew's needles, rather than its bark.
Amid the resurgence of interest in plant medicines, many small start-up
companies have emerged with novel approaches to drug discovery. Shaman
Pharmaceuticals, based in San Carlos, California, for example, is exploring
traditional plant-derived medicines already used by native tribes and
communities. 'By using traditional knowledge there is greater likelihood of
yielding an active compound or a pharmaceutical,' said Lisa Conte, Shaman's
president.
Shaman is the traditional name for 'medicine man'. Founded in 1989, the
company already has two drugs in clinical trials. One is an anti-viral drug
against respiratory infections; the second is a broad-spectrum antifungal
agent derived from a plant used by native tribes in North America and Africa
for the treatment of infections.
Conte claimed that by using traditional medicines, Shaman's 'hit rate' - the
number of times screening finds a compound with activity against a certain
target - is 'one in two extracts versus the mass screening process in large
pharmaceutical companies which is one in thousands'. Shaman has policies for
compensating countries where its drugs are found. 'We are creating an
economic alternative to rain forest destruction,' said Conte.
'If they can make a living by collecting our products, it gives them an
incentive for leaving the forests intact.' Compensating a country where a
drug is discovered is a controversial idea in the pharmaceutical industry.
But Balick of the New York Botanical Garden said that drug companies are now
much more receptive to the notion.
Last year, for example, Merck signed an innovative agreement with Costa
Rica's National Institute of Biodiversity that could be one model for how
the industry could negotiate agreements that would direct money back into
source countries. Under the agreement, Merck paid the institute Dollars 51m
for the right to analyse indigenous plants and animals for possible
medicines or other products.
