
MR David Blunkett, Labour spokesman on local government, said yesterday that
recent government figures on council spending showed 'yet another
fundamental flaw in the government's system of standard spending
assessments'. The assessments are used to estimate how much councils need to
spend on the services they provide.
The party said the figures showed that some councils were gaining government
grant from the way in which the central grant system took account of the
cost of servicing council debt. Discrepancies occur because grant is
distributed according to notional rather than actual debt for each council.
The total for capital financing, however, is based on the total actually
spent. The current rules on taking account of capital financing mean
Tory-controlled Westminster, for example, benefits by almost Pounds 100 per
poll-tax payer and Labour Lewisham by more than Pounds 50 a head. Tory
Huntingdon loses by slightly more than Pounds 45 a head, as does Labour
Thurrock.
Labour said yesterday that it would make the discrepancy a priority in an
urgent review of spending assessments.
Its reform of the grant system would add new factors to the assessments.
They would include factors such as unemployment rates, mortality rates and
total disposable income.
Mr Michael Portillo, minister for local government, defended the system,
saying: 'If you base grant on actual debt charges you reward overspending
and penalise prudent authorities.'
Labour says the debt was 'government-sanctioned' because councils were not
prevented from borrowing above credit approval limits. Ministers argue that
authorities should not be 'bailed out' for choosing to incur larger debts.
Labour estimates that its planned changes would eventually mean a shift in
grant away from shire districts and towards urban areas. The possibility of
assessing social need differently in London from the rest of the country
could mean that the effect of the changes was less straightforward in the
capital. Reforms would almost certainly be phased in, perhaps with a 'safety
net' preventing an authority losing more than a set proportion of its grant
in a single year. The first changes would be made in time for determining
grant in 1993-94.
In a few key areas, such as provision for the under-fives, Labour would
consider withholding grant unless councils actually provided a minimum
service. While the Tories say this amounts to more central control, Labour
compares it with the government's use of grants for specific purposes only.
