
CANCER Research Campaign, the UK charity, has signed a deal with a US
pharmaceuticals company to develop a pioneering cancer treatment which could
earn the charity as much as Pounds 20m a year.
The drug, called Temozolomide, is the first effective treatment for glioma,
a form of brain-tumour. Cancer Research funded research and development of
the drug which was originally discovered by Aston University in Birmingham.
Further clinical trials to establish the drug's effectiveness on other forms
of cancer are being set up. Professor Edward Newlands, the head of cancer
medicine at Charing Cross and Westminster Medical School and director of the
drug's clinical trials, said it may prove effective against bone marrow
cancer.
The agreement with Schering-Plough, the largest ever concluded by the
charity's wholly-owned technology transfer company, is worth an immediate
Dollars 1.5m with a further Dollars 4m paid to the charity during
development.
Once the drug is launched, the charity will receive royalty payments. These
could be worth up to Pounds 20m a year, according to Dr Sue Foden, managing
director of Cancer Research Campaign Technology, the charity's technology
transfer subsidiary. Last year the charity's income, raised mainly through
voluntary contributions, was Pounds 40.6m.
Under the agreement, the charity will receive about 40 per cent of royalties
which are worth between 2 per cent and 8 per cent of sales depending on
volume.
The remaining 60 per cent of royalties will be paid to Rhone-Poulenc Rorer,
the Franco-American company that helped with initial research, Aston
University which discovered the molecule, and Charing Cross and Westminster
Medical School which developed it.
Professor Newlands explained that half of glioma patients using the drug had
shown clinical benefit, and as many as 40 per cent had demonstrated an
improvement when examined with brain-scans. Patients with skin cancer had
also shown some improvement. He said this was the first time a drug had had
a repeatable noteworthy effect on brain tumours.
The charity said that it hoped Schering-Plough would be able to use the US
Food and Drug Administration's accelerated licensing programme so that the
medicine would be on the American market within five years.
The potential market for Temozolomide was difficult to predict because it
depended whether it worked against other cancers, Professor Newlands said.
