
THE POOR state of the UK housing market is dragging on into a sensitive
period for UK building societies, raising doubts about profitability and
credit quality as they look to refinance a substantial part of their Pounds
20bn capital market borrowings.
In total, UK building societies have Pounds 2.6bn bonds and syndicated loans
maturing this year, rising to Pounds 4.5bn in 1993 and Pounds 3.4bn in 1994.
One thing is certain: banks and bond market investors are demanding much
higher returns than in the late 1980s, when building societies were first
allowed to tap the capital markets.
In 1987, for example, Halifax, the largest building society, signed a
five-year Pounds 300m multi-currency facility which gave it access to
sterling funding at just 0.05 per cent (5 basis points) over the London
interbank offered rate (Libor).
The facility runs out in July, and Halifax would have to pay at least 30
basis points over Libor to replace it with a similar loan.
During the late 1980s, building societies faced a declining inflow of
savings from retail depositors and increasing demand for housing finance. To
meet this shortfall they expanded capital markets borrowings, to more than
20 per cent of total funding in many cases.
While demand for new mortgages has fallen sharply, there is little prospect
of replacing capital markets debts with retail deposits. Despite the
severity of the recession, building societies saw a net outflow of funds in
November and December.
Bankers are taking a cautious approach. At the end of last year, Chelsea
Building Society had to improve the terms of a planned Pounds 125m loan to
attract wary banks into the deal.
With this in mind, the bigger building societies are looking to tap other
sources of funding, such as the bond and medium-term note markets, where
better terms are available. The bigger societies now have access to a
greater variety of wholesale markets, and so have less need for 'stand-by'
banking facilities. Last June, for example, Halifax Building Society set up
a Pounds 3bn medium-term note programme.
'Since our loans were arranged in the late 1980s our wholesale funding base
has matured and the need for syndicated credits is less apparent,' said Mr
Mike Ellis, treasurer of the Halifax. 'We can now afford to be more
selective in our use of markets.'
But even in the bond markets there is upward pressure on margins. New types
of instrument will have to be used if funding costs are to be held down.
Around 40 to 50 per cent of sterling floating-rate note issues, the favoured
form of bond market borrowing for building societies in the late 1980s, are
held by banks. These are usually the same banks which lent money to building
societies through syndicated credits, bought mortgage-backed bonds and
sometimes lent money directly to UK consumers for house purchases.
As the property market has slumped, these banks have exercised a sharp
pull-back from new housing-related exposures. There are fewer willing buyers
of building society bonds.
Hence increased borrowing costs do not only reflect a decline in the
perceived credit quality of building societies. 'The level of funding that
the building societies are seeking is more than the banks are willing to
give,' said Ms Zoe Shaw, director at Westdeutsche Landesbank, the German
bank which is an active lender to the building society sector.
While the bigger societies still remain - measured against most other
financial institutions - strong and tightly regulated, there is little doubt
the credit quality of building societies looks under pressure.
There have already been some forced takeovers. At the end of last year, Town
& Country, the 15th largest institution, was rescued by the Woolwich. There
is intense speculation that other building societies will have to be bailed
out.
Although the rate of residential mortgage defaults looks to be slowing, up
to 80,000 homes will be repossessed this year.
The rate of repossessions means building societies could be left managing
large, vacant residential property portfolios. Partly to avoid this, and
partly to satisfy political pressure, building societies have pledged to
provide Pounds 1bn this year to alleviate the crisis.
Most of the money will be made available in the form of cheap loans to
housing associations, which will in turn buy properties in danger of
repossession and then rent them.
If the housing associations are to charge affordable rents, the loans have
to be made at very low interest rates, as low as 3.5 per cent in London,
where property prices are highest.
Yet the cost of funds to building societies, whether from the capital
markets or from depositors, is 10 per cent or more. Hence funding mortgage
rescue loans will eat into building societies profits for some years to
come.
The societies hope to recoup losses by taking an equity interest in the
properties. If homes become vacant after five years, assuming property
prices have gone up, the housing association will have to sell on the open
market. The building society will take 80 per cent of any capital gain.
Hence the net cost to the building societies will depend on when properties
become vacant, whether property prices have risen and the cost of funding
cheap loans to housing associations in the intervening period.
