
WITH PRICE stabilisation accords for commodities off the international
agenda, their chief sponsor, the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development (Unctad), is seeking to harness rather than buck the market to
help commodity exporting developing countries.
Unctad officials are developing a computerised commodity information system
that they believe could transform marketing, investment and diversification
decisions by governments and private companies. Micas (micro-computer based
commodity information and analysis system), now in a pilot phase, should
eventually be capable of providing comprehensive, up-to-date information on
all aspects of commodity use, production, trade and consumption at all
levels from the world to the production unit.
Unctad's main aim is to help poor countries take sensible decisions on
developing and managing their commodity economies with the aid of systematic
and timely information.
This, officials argue, will enable them to compete more effectively on world
markets. The system can be used for policy analysis within government or in
the management of individual production units.
For instance, a policy-maker in the Philippines looking at the options for
further processing of coconuts could, at the touch of a computer key,
display the most recent figures on worldwide trade in coconuts and coconut
products, trends in production, consumption and trade, production of and
markets for coconut products by country and the names, production facilities
and capacity utilisation of every company involved in coconut products.
Demonstrations of Micas in 15 Asian countries, including India, China and
Japan, have shown the potential usefulness of the system, says Mr Jay
Colebrook, who is in charge of the project. The database includes existing
Unctad trade information and can tap the computerised agricultural
statistics of the Rome-based Food and Agriculture Organisation. Micas will
also contain information on upwards of 50,000 companies around the world.
If all goes well, Unctad plans to supply the software to developing country
users free of charge on condition that they undertake to feed the system
with the necessary (non-confidential) information. The UN agency aims to
meet the running costs by selling information to private companies.
Mr Colebrook hopes next year to begin installing a pilot version of Micas,
which has been developed with financial aid from the Italian government, in
at least a dozen Third World countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America.
