
THE DOUBLE LIFE OF VERONIQUE (15) Curzon Mayfair
THE LAST BOY SCOUT (18) MGM Trocadero
THE MAN IN THE MOON (PG) Cannon Trocadero
CROSS MY HEART (PG) Curzon Phoenix
I have no evidence to put before a court of law, but I believe we are being
hypnotised in Krzysztof Kieslowski's The Double Life Of Veronique. How else
explain the ability of a French-Polish film with a nonsensical plot premise -a girl from Kracow has an exact double in Clermont Ferrand and dies
leaving her a legacy of new awarenesses and sensitivities - to enthrall and
enchant us like no European film in recent memory?
Hypnotists, we know, often use objects to fascinate and transfix their
patients. Likewise Kieslowski. As in earlier films - Camera Buff, No End, A
Short Film About Killing - the screen is a mystical assault-course of the
ordinary made extraordinary. A lightbulb, a glass bauble, a tea-bag floating
in hot water: the inanimate world glows as mysteriously as the animate.
Through these deceiving sensory spaces, in which rain patterns on a wall
seem as tactile as real rain on the face or in which an 'innocent' puppet
show prophesies or recapitulates real events, Weronica and Veronique (both
played by Cannes Best Actress Irene Jacob) step into self-realisation.
Yes, but what is it all about? Neither heroine knows her Doppelganger and
they glimpse each other only once, in a demonstration-torn Polish square.
Yet like twins they have near-symbiotic tastes, feelings and skills. (Both
are gifted classical singers.) They also share a heart ailment which kills
Polish Weronica in mid-concert, bequeathing to French Veronique an instant,
bewildering sense of loss. The death also precipitates a series of trysts
with a young writer and puppet showman (Philippe Volter) who may be a
conduit between the dead girl and the living.
Political metaphor-seekers will no doubt spy a fable in which the Eastern
bloc's demise arouses a belated sense of kinship in the West, with the
artist as mage or mediator. But the film's magic is belittled by pat
equations. Kieslowski offers something larger: a vision of the world as an
evolving miracle of the imagination, a floating interchange between past,
present and future whose panhuman perspective allows each individual tragedy
to be redeemed by kindred lives facing kindred challenges.
But even above and beyond such larger decodings, this beautiful film is its
own enigma: as cryptic and glittering as the glass ball in Citizen Kane
(which has a twin here) and endowed with a soaring human radiance, both in
repose and in response, by Irene Jacob.
Meanwhile, back in Hollywood. You too, like screenwriter Shane Black who
sold his script of The Last Boy Scout for a record-breaking Dollars 1.75m,
could earn large sums by submitting seemingly simple action ideas to
Hollywood. Just follow Mr Black's guidelines. Whenever anyone is rude to his
film's hero - battered, wisecracking detective Bruce Willis - make sure he
is punched in the nose. Whenever anyone tries to 'fix' an American football
game, make sure he is punched in the nose. Whenever anyone is unkind to
animals or fails to help an old lady cross a street, make sure he is punched
in the nose.
We have never seen so many people punched in the nose. British director Tony
Scott, who has become a Hollywood multi-millionaire by directing expensive
tripe (Beverly Hills Cop 2, Days Of Thunder), gives The Last Boy Scout his
usual high-gloss visuals. Los Angeles throbs with burnished glamour as Mr
Willis and his adopted sidekick Daman Wayans, a black ex-footballer
threatened by a cartel of villains, proceed through town bashing and being
bashed.
Nose-pokings are supplemented by hand-stabbings, knee-bashings and electric
cattle-proddings. And whenever a car is stepped into, we know it will be
written off at the end of the sequence. One of our hero's proud past
achievements - we see it in flashback - is to have saved Jimmy Carter's
life. He was once a presidential bodyguard, it seems, who threw himself
between JC and a passing bullet. This indication that a man of Willis's
timbre once worked for the Democratic Party may be the best campaign
advertisement the Republicans have yet had.
The week's paper-handkerchief franchise is fought over by America's The Man
In The Moon and France's Cross My Heart. In each film a loved one dies,
leaving the hero or heroine(s) to cope with that Great Emotional Beyond
called bereavement.
The Man In The Moon, I must confess, left me feeling in an alarmingly mushy
state. Only the presence of my colleagues prevented me from extracting my
own handkerchief at the end and blowing loudly into it. Deep in Louisiana,
Sam Waterston and Tess Harper watch their two teenage daughters (Reese
Witherspoon and Emily Warfield) grow up and fall competitively in love with
the boy next door (Jason London). Then they have to cope with the trauma of
a tractor accident.
No narrative manoeuvre is spared to elicit our tears: subplots include a
near-miscarriage (Miss Harper's) and the heartbreak rivalry of the sisters.
But Robert Mulligan (Summer Of '42, Bloodbrothers) directs as if knowing how
to throw us into the deep end without water-wings and cameraman Freddie
Francis stands by to paint the gorgeous backcloth of a Southern summer.
My handkerchief remained unused in Jacques Fansten's Cross My Heart,
although I might have taken it out to wave in surrender as the film keeps
firing the same trite story ammunition at us. When Martin (Sylvain Copans),
a fatherless 12-year-old, loses his mother, he tries to conceal her death to
avoid being sent to an orphanage. His schoolfriends - what are copains for? -gallantly assist the cover-up by arranging lies, alibis and a secret, DIY
funeral using an old grandfather clock as coffin.
Amid all these mildly diverting logistics we are never actually told what
Martin is feeling. Is he upset by Mum's demise? Indifferent? Pleased? And
how he has kept her body for two days in the house without it smelling or
developing rigor mortis? (He has no problem dressing her for internment in
her best frock).
Steven Spielberg, who reportedly wept profusely on first seeing the film,
has persuaded Universal to buy the story rights for an American remake. We
tremble in anticipation. Even if Mr S irons out the inconsistencies, he is
still left with a plot in which plaintive pathos is the main if not only
keynote.
A final wave to the 1992 Berlin Film Festival, now departing into history.
We who were there will remember the fine movies, the mixed weather (snow,
sleet, a hint of sun, more sleet) and the sense of Berlin's own history
playfully processing itself into a souvenir culture. Did you know you can
now buy wooden Russian dolls on the Ku'damm pavements which bear the faces
of Gorbachev and Yeltsin? Inside each Russian leader is a series of smaller
ones trying to get out.
Lawrence Kasdan's ambitious, likable fresco of LA life Grand Canyon, noted
in my last report, won the Golden Bear for Best Film. Istvan Szabo's Dear
Emma, Dear Bobe, likewise noted, gained the runner-up Special Jury Prize. No
major honour, I rue, for the best film of the final days, Georgia's The
Beloved. Mikhail Kalatoschwili - whose grandfather directed the famous The
Cranes Are Flying - creates a caustic, brilliant pageant out of the Red
Army's invasion of Georgia after the October Revolution.
The cruelty of war is conveyed not by rhetoric but by a harrowing
understatement. Casual executions, passionless carnage, shamefaced
betrayals; and the numbed meting out of rough justice by a father who
executes his own son after the youngster has betrayed a friend.
A bouquet too, in default of a Bear, for Paul Schrader's Light Sleeper.
Willem Dafoe and Susan Sarandon star in this lissome thriller from the
director of American Gigolo and The Comfort Of Strangers. The movie turns
New York into a city of the mind much as Taxi Driver, scripted by Schrader,
did 15 years ago. It opens here on March 13: more then.
