
It is time to blow the whistle on London Underground's Jubilee Line. Plans
to extend it to Docklands at a cost of Pounds 1.7bn have been rendered
redundant by the financial collapse of Canary Wharf. To proceed with the
project now could be the railway equivalent of building Concorde.
This is not an assertion that many outside the Treasury will wish to hear,
but the facts argue in its favour. To set them in context, it is worth
dwelling for a moment on the project's history.
Extending the Underground to Docklands and the rest of London's eastern
hinterland is not a new idea. The Jubilee Line had two previous incarnations
in the 1970s: first, as the Fleet Line, running from the West End to the
City before turning southwards through Wapping to Lewisham; and second, as
the River Line, following the same course to the City but then serving the
Isle of Dogs and Thamesmead.
The financial case for these projects, however, never stacked up, and after
the oil price crises of the 1970s, the then Labour government was in no mood
for extravagance. So while a vestige of those earlier plans survives in the
form of a pair of empty tunnels running forlornly under the streets of
London eastwards as far as Aldwych, the passenger-carrying part of the
re-named Jubilee Line never stretched beyond its present terminus at Charing
Cross.
When, in 1981, the Conservative government set up the London Docklands
Development Corporation to oversee the regeneration of docklands, it had to
look again at east London's transport needs. But an Underground line from
the West End costing more than Pounds 1bn still looked an absurdly expensive
proposition in the context of the modest regeneration then envisaged.
Instead, the government opted for the construction of the Docklands Light
Railway on a shoestring budget of just Pounds 77m.
That might have been the end of the story had it not been for the Reichmann
brothers. But when they and their private property company, Olympia & York,
arrived in 1987 with their grandiose scheme to turn the the Isle of Dogs
into a business centre rivalling the West End and the City, the transport
plans were thrown into chaos.
Contrary to popular myth, the government was not tardy in its response.
Rather, it reacted with astonishing speed and generosity. Within months, it
was carrying out detailed work on the options for improving Docklands'
transport infrastructure. The East London Rail Study was published in
January 1989, and in November that same year a Bill to authorise
construction of the Jubilee Line extension went before parliament. Some
Pounds 3.5bn was committed to roads, the Underground line and the upgrading
of the Docklands Light Railway.
Meanwhile, central London, crippled during the boom years of the late 1980s
by appalling congestion and decaying infrastructure, was left to rot.
The biggest single factor underlying this investment in Docklands
infrastructure was the prediction that the Canary Wharf development would
boost the number of jobs in Docklands to 150,000 by the year 2005. (Canary
Wharf alone, which today houses fewer than 4,000 people, was predicted to
provide jobs for up to 55,000 on completion.)
But Canary Wharf's financial collapse and the death of the commercial
property market have pushed those forecasts into the realms of fantasy. If
they are ever achieved, it will not be until at least a decade later than
expected.
It is too late, however, to delay much of the transport infrastructure. By
this time next year, the bulk of the Pounds 1.65bn Docklands roadbuilding
programme - the biggest road programme in Britain - will be complete,
leaving the area with excellent access for buses, coaches, taxis and cars.
Unlike the City or the West End, Docklands will also benefit from cheap and
almost unlimited parking.
The Docklands Light Railway, meanwhile, will have been transformed from its
present toy-town railway status to an urban mass transit system. Some Pounds
800m has been spent on extending the line to Bank in the City and Beckton in
the east, and by next year the line's capacity will have risen from its 1987
level of 15,000 passengers a day to 15,000 passengers an hour.
Few transport planners would dispute that, with this infrastructure in
place, the combined capacity of all transport modes to Docklands will be
adequate well beyond the Jubilee Line's planned opening date of 1996. So
does it not make sense to shelve the Jubilee Line extension until it is
needed, and get on with more pressing projects?
The Jubilee Line extension's advocates answer that to do so would seal
Docklands' doom. With the Jubilee Line in place, Canary Wharf could still
fulfil its creators' dream of becoming a third London business centre.
Without it, the development can never hope to be regarded as anything other
than a second-rate out-of-town location for clerical and back-office
functions.
The difficulty with this argument is that it contains an element of wishful
thinking. There is little likelihood that that Canary Wharf would fulfill
its creators' dream in the foreseeable future even if the Jubilee Line were
in place, and the Treasury will rightly question whether such a large
expenditure of taxpayers' money should be gambled on such an uncertain
out-come.
Meanwhile there are many other transport projects in London to which
investment could be usefully diverted - and which, in pure transport terms,
deliver greater benefits per pound than the Jubilee Line. London Transport,
though extremely reluctant to abandon the Jubilee Line after investing so
much time and money in it, has started to draw up an emergency list of
projects it could bring forward in its place.
The long-overdue upgrading of the existing Underground system, the stepping
up of the station modernisation programme, an acceleration of the planned
Northern Line upgrade and the possibility of bringing forward the Pounds
1.7bn Paddington-Liverpool Street CrossRail project by a year are among the
benefits that would accrue to Londoners in the next five years if only the
Jubilee Line extension were postponed.
Even that would only soak up Pounds 600m to Pounds 700m. With the change
from Pounds 1.7bn, the government would have enough to console everyone
working at Canary Wharf with a free Rolls Royce, and still save the taxpayer
money.
