
OUT OF the desert, the Mirage arose. One night, there was a vast empty lot.
Next day, on this shimmering crossroads marked by a thousand points of
glitz, appeared the most dazzling structure the Las Vegas Strip had ever
seen.
'It's what God would have done,' Steve Wynn liked to quip, adding
irreverently, 'if He'd had the money.'
Wynn had another one-liner which went down well with business audiences.
'What do you do when you owe the bank Dollars 500m and, on the first day of
the month, you can't meet the interest charges?' Pause. 'Absolutely
nothing]'
In reality, Wynn's dream of a casino took three years to build. But it went
up so fast, it did seem like a mirage. He is a showman first and a
businessman second, albeit an operator who staked more than anyone had ever
risked before in building a casino-hotel. It cost Dollars 620m when it
opened in November 1989, and that was just for starters.
Donald Trump had also coveted the site but Wynn turned him down. They were
friends, but not really friendly. Trump, in a stinging phrase which Wynn's
wife, Elaine, has never forgiven, once accused Steve of being a classic
under-achiever.
The Donald, as his wife, Ivana, liked to call him, was left to build his own
dream of a casino in Atlantic City, New Jersey. It was called the Taj Mahal
and was billed, with characteristic hype, as the 'eighth wonder of the
world.'
The contrast between these two places, the Mirage and and the Taj Mahal, is
the story of casino gambling in the 1990s: in effect, a long-range duel
across the tables between the two main personalities in the gaming industry,
Wynn out west and Trump out east. Rivalry is not, perhaps, the right word -
although one man has emerged as leader of the gaming industry and the
other's main casino is in chapter 11 bankruptcy - because Wynn himself has
never seen their competition in personal terms.
The two men share a flamboyance of character but their approach to casino
gambling, which has set the style in their opposing resorts, has been
radically different. Wynn is glossy, lively, funny, mercurial, fast-talking,
hard-driving, a man who has lived gambling since his boyhood.
'Since the day I took my first breath, I have been a kid who has never had a
meal, a dollar for tuition or a piece of clothing on my back that didn't
come from gambling,' he claims.
On his first visit to Vegas, as a 10-year-old, he was dazzled by its
glamour. Unfortunately, his father had a weakness for the dice and went
broke. It was a useful lesson.
'If you wanna make money in a casino,' Wynn says, in a classic formulation,
'own one.'
The Mirage is his answer.
The opening was a local affair. The whole town was agog to see the inside of
the place. Long lines of people, waiting in the sun, pressed against the
green cordon of security guards. At five to noon, the line buckled. And at
five past, the place was jammed. The people poured in, baseball caps
bobbing, bomber jackets billowing, T-shirts flapping over Day-Glo bermudas,
trainers thudding below pale pink pants and blue jeans - the whole rag, tag
and bobtail of a holiday crowd on the spree.
No one had ever opened a casino of this super-colossal size before - SNAP] -
just like that. All of a sudden, the air was filled with noise. The slots
were whirring and chunking, line after line of them, the coins rattling
around like sea shells in the tide. This heavy-metal rhythm was overscored
by a sort of moaning, siren-like scream from a bank of super-slots, shouts,
greetings, laughter and, above it all, snatches of rock music, loudspeaker
anouncements, bells ringing, metal clashing. The sweet sound - as it has
proved, month after month - of success.
Overnight, the Mirage became the focus of the Las Vegas Strip. On a basic
Y-shape of three towers, 30 storeys high, it contains 3,000 suites and
rooms. In front, a home-made volcano erupts into the night sky every 15
minutes. Inside, a tropical rain forest, under a glass atrium, leads guests
into the casino, glittering light-and-dark. Behind a glass wall roam white
tigers, by the lagoon cavort dolphins. It's kitsch, it's over the top, it's
fun.
The Mirage won over Dollars 409m from gaming and made Dollars 251m from
hotel and other income in its first year, an unparalleled success. The
operation needed to generate income of this magnitude because it has to make
more than Dollars 1m a day simply to meet its interest and running costs.
Wynn is not under any illusions about the task ahead. 'We dare not stand
still,' he says. 'It's exhilarating, like driving a racing car at high
speed. But another bend is always coming up to meet you.'
Trump, by contrast, lacked that intuitive feel for casinos that comes from a
lifetime in gaming. His whole experience was in real estate, which is
certainly a big risk but of a completely different kind. What attracted him
to gaming was the (apparently) amazing cash flow of casinos.
When Trump, nosing around Atlantic City late in the '80s, finally acquired
his first property, Trump Plaza, and then a second one, Trump Castle -
putting Ivana in charge - it looked an exciting prospect. And, indeed, it
might have turned out well enough - given the drabness of the place and New
Jersey's constraints on gaming - if Trump had not fallen for another
project, an extravaganza to outdo all other casinos.
The Taj Mahal, which was supposed to demonstrate the art of the deal, was an
unknown quantity. Its costs were out of control, the market was already
oversold; by the time, it was completed, it had cost the best part of
Dollars 1,000m. But if Steve could do it in Vegas, spending all that money,
then Donald was determined he could show them in Atlantic City. A banner
went up at the entrance to town for the grand opening of the Taj in April
1990: 'More than a Mirage.'
The Taj Mahal is big, certainly. Its 90 minarets shine out over the ocean
like coloured onion domes. The casino, bright with Indian motifs and
decoration, covers 120,000 sq ft. Its serried ranks of slot machines, like a
painted metal army rooted to the drill square, stretch out on all sides
under Viennese chandeliers. It drew the crowds - Trump's affair with film
starlet Marla Maples had made him a media celebrity - but the operation was
ramshackle.
The times, too, were changing. Within three months of its glorifed opening,
Trump was locked in a struggle with the banks to meet his various interest
payments. In its first full year of operation, the Taj reported losses of
Dollars 120m.
Atlantic City suffers compared with Las Vegas because it is not a
destination resort. People go to Vegas for vacations and trade conventions:
the gambling has become only a part - albeit by far the most lucrative part -of a shiny package which includes shows, boxing, sports, high action and
fast women, at a cut price. It is hard to see why anyone should want to go
to Atlantic City, especially in winter.
What now? Atlantic City might pull through, at a reduced level. There are
too many casinos chasing too few customers. The Taj, with one of Wynn's
former managers in charge, is doing better. It earned Dollars 29m this
January - no mean feat - but still below par. As anyone can see who visits
the place, it is essentially a decorated shed, blown up to mammoth size. Its
only message is: big is beautiful.
The Mirage, too, will find competition tougher in the recession but the
joint is still jumping night after night. Aware of the need to fight for
family appeal, Wynn is now planning to build a new casino, Treasure Island,
on 17 acres of the present Mirage parking site, at a start-up cost of
Dollars 300m. Launching the project, Wynn appeared in a pirate's hat. Only
in Las Vegas, one feels.
David Spanier's new book All Right, Okay, You Win - Inside Las Vegas, will
be published by Secker & Warburg on Monday, March 23, price Pounds 16.99.
