
WHEN Piet Norval and Wayne Ferreira met Goran Ivanisevic and Goran Prpic in
a tennis doubles semi-final the other day, it signalled a small piece of
Olympic history.
Both pairs were already assured of medals. This meant that Norval and
Ferreira were the first South Africans to win Olympic medals since boxers
Daniel Bekker and William Meyers, and 400 metres runner Malcolm Spence,
collected a silver and two bronzes in Rome in 1960. The two Gorans were the
first ever to win Olympic medals in the name of Croatia. After the match
Ferreira said: 'It is possible that by us winning South Africa's first medal
our fellow countrymen will take courage and compete better.
'The nationalist element played an important role in the match. Up until now
the only South African finalist has been a swimmer in the 50m free-style.'
(Peter Williams, who came fourth.) Xolile Yawa, 13th in the 10,000m on
Monday and the first black South African in an Olympic final, seemed to have
escaped his notice. But sportsmen in competition can be blinkered.
There have been many other happy returns in these Games. Erika Salumae won
Estonia's first gold since the palmy days when they were a power in
weightlifting and wrestling and before the Soviet Union invaded.
After her victory in the women's cycling sprint, Salumae said happily: 'It's
marvellous. I think that, at the moment, they are throwing a huge party in
my country. It's very exciting.'
It might have been Estonia's first gold in cycling, but it was Salumae's
second. She won in Seoul when representing the Soviet Union.
The Toniste brothers, Tonu and Toomas, who collected their yachting bronze
medal for Estonia in gangster suits, won silver for the Soviet Union in
1988.
Frankie Fredericks' silver for Namibia in the 100m was that country's first
Olympic medal ever. But then it did not exist as an independent country four
years ago.
The Barcelona Games have also marked the debut of several semi-countries.
Fedor Kasspu won the gold in the 75kg weightlifting in the dull green of the
Unified Team. But when he stood on the podium the audience had the privilege
of hearing the Olympic debut of the Moldovan national anthem.
There are 172 countries entered in these Olympics, a record. But for 1996
the Atlanta organising committee is planning to welcome 190 to the centenary
Games. Atlanta calculates there will be 13 more teams from what used to be
the Soviet Union, plus five countries that no one has yet thought of -
Catalonia, for example.
The Barcelona Games will probably mark the only appearance of the Unified
Team. They might also mark the solitary Olympic entry of Bosnia-Hercegovina
and of the Independent Olympic Participants, which is Serbia and Montenegro
under a five-ringed flag of convenience.
The war in the Balkans has cast a strange glow over the Olympics.
Ivanisevic, never slow to take the moral and political high ground,
proclaimed after one five-set victory: 'Today I was tired but I think that
winning a medal for my country, Croatia, gives me strength to do anything.'
Mehmed Skender, the weightlifter, was in a trench in Zenica with a machine
gun when he was selected for the Bosnian team. He has surrendered the hell
of life in Bosnia for the hell of the Olympic Village, incapable of
performing at anything like his best, unable to reach his family at home.
'We are here to show the world that we are alive and that we exist,' said
Mladan Talic of the Olympic Committee of Bosnia-Hercegovina.
These Games have also seen the continued spread of medals to developing
countries. On Wednesday evening, Ximena Restrepo came third in the women's
400m to win Colombia's first athletics medal.
The increased number of events has also helped put unaccustomed names on the
medal table. Indonesia won its first Olympic medal, a silver in archery, in
Seoul. In Barcelona it has already won two golds, two silvers and a bronze,
all in badminton, which is an Olympic sport for the first time.
But the biggest redistribution of medals has been to the People's Republic
of China. It re-entered Olympic competition in Los Angeles in 1984 with 32
medals. It won 28 in Seoul. Its total in Barcelona is already way past that.
A lot of eyes in Barcelona have focused on the gallant performances of the
many small or weak nations. But over them all looms the growing power of one
very big nation.
