
THE GOVERNMENT is to give Pounds 55m towards Manchester's bid to stage the
Olympic Games in the year 2000. If the bid succeeds, the government will
provide up to Pounds 360m over the next eight years to underpin a Pounds 1bn
building programme.
The International Olympic Committee will choose the 2000 host in September
next year. Manchester's competition is expected to come from Brasilia,
Sydney, Beijing, Milan and Berlin.
Manchester would have had little chance without strong government support, a
lesson learned from its bid for the 1996 games, when the government was
half-hearted and Manchester came fifth out of six contenders. Atlanta won.
Yesterday's decision represents a significant change in government policy
towards sport.
This has been helped by the fact that Mr John Major, the prime minister, and
several Cabinet colleagues are sports fans, but the presence in north-west
England of more than 20 Conservative marginal parliamentary seats has almost
certainly been a factor.
Mr Major said last night: 'We propose to make every effort to make sure we
win this prize for Manchester, the north-west and the country as a whole.'
The benefit of staging the games has already been estimated by independent
economists at about Pounds 2bn.
The decision followed months of lobbying by a team led by the Duke of
Westminster; Mr Bob Scott, the Manchester theatrical impresario; and Mr
Graham Stringer, Labour leader of Manchester city council.
Government efforts will be led by Mr Michael Heseltine, environment
secretary, who will also investigate putting up to Pounds 60m of extra urban
funding into Manchester to improve areas near the main facilities.
Mr Scott said Manchester would now be competing for the games on an equal
footing with other contenders, all of which were backed by their
governments. Manchester needed not only Pounds 2m to help fund the Pounds 5m
bid, but Pounds 53m more to make a start on a national velodrome for cycling
events and to prepare the site of an Olympic stadium.
The public sector commitment is for about a third of eventual total capital
costs. Mr Scott believes this will be enough to diminish long-term risks
sufficiently to get the rest from the private sector.
If Manchester wins the games, the biggest single sporting element would be a
Pounds 170m Olympic stadium.
Both would help to regenerate east Manchester where new housing - the
long-term use for the village - would be needed eventually.
Leading light of the north Page 22
Observer Page 22
