
YOU CAN buy a set of grainy, black-and-white postcards, with the joke title
'12 reasons why not to move to Seattle' in the more progressive bookstores
of this beautiful, economically buoyant and civilised city.
The cards, which purport to show extremely unflattering pictures of the
area, are meant to be sent by Seattleites to friends or relatives in other
parts of the US who might be thinking of moving to the city. The aim is to
put them off joining the wave of humanity which has swept into the Puget
Sound region over the past few years as its economy has surged.
But the joke also makes a serious point: the growth and immigration of the
past decade have created substantial developmental problems for Seattle and
the surrounding four-county Puget Sound region, which together account for
half Washington state's economic output.
The danger is that unless the region takes control of the change, it could
end up losing the very quality which is attracting new immigrants and
business to the area - its extremely attractive lifestyle.
That said, the economic boom of the 1980s has now given way to a slower pace
of growth. Seattle has fared much better than the rest of the US in the
recession of 1991/2, and analysts suggest that its growth will still outpace
the national average during the 1990s - but only just.
In other words, the region is not so economically secure that it can afford
to take growth for granted. It remains highly dependent on Boeing, the
world's largest commercial aircraft manufacturer, and to a lesser extent on
the timber logging which first brought it prosperity in the 19th century.
Boeing, which has its headquarters just south of Seattle and is by far the
region's largest employer, seems set to enjoy strong long-term growth. Yet
there are doubts about its short-term business outlook, and local
businessmen still recall the dark recessionary days of the 'Boeing Bust' in
the early 1970s.
The timber industry, for its part, is contracting as environmentalists'
initiatives to save the Northern Spotted Owl restrict the supply of logs.
Other growth industries will offset these trends, notably the computer
software sector centred on Microsoft, which has its headquarters in a
Seattle suburb.
Important, too, will be the region's growing importance as a shipping and
airline entrepot mid-way between Europe and the Far East.
But finding a balance between encouraging growth and restraining it will be
far from easy. 'It's a very delicate act, but it has to be done because the
quality of life is partly what brings people here,' says Mr Paul Sommers,
research director at the University of Washington's Northwest Policy Center.
And the balancing act is causing no little friction: between slow-growth
environmentalists and fast-track industrialists; between property owners
threatened by development restrictions and planning authorities; between the
city of Seattle and its surrounding, middle-class suburbs; and not least
between old residents, so-called 'lesser Seattleites' who dislike the
changes in their city, and the newcomers, many of them refugees from
recession-hit, environmentally-troubled California.
But it is at least encouraging, amid all this heat, that the community is
tackling such issues head-on. Alarmed by the urban sprawl created in the
late 1980s, the Washington state legislature passed a growth management act
in 1990 which requires all cities and counties to draw up development plans
which define urban boundaries and create a coherent, consistent development
plan.
Mr Norm Rice, Seattle's popular black mayor, recently unveiled proposals for
the city designed to relieve pressure on the urban fringe, partly by winning
back middle-class people lost to the surrounding suburbs. He envisages a
series of 'urban villages' developed along the route of a proposed
mass-transit system.
'We can either take control of growth and channel it in ways which will
enhance our community, or we can sit on our hands and watch unmanaged growth
destroy all of the things we value about Seattle and the Puget Sound
region,' the mayor said.
'Seattle,' adds a regional planner, 'is still in the fortunate position of
being able to avoid the mistakes made by virtually every other major US
city.'
If there is a degree of smugness about that remark, it is understandable.
For more than a decade now Seattle has been picking up awards as the 'most
liveable' city in the US, one of the 'best places to do business,' to 'raise
children' and even America's 'top city for bicycling'.
This is in large measure because of the sheer beauty of its physical
surroundings. It is bounded on two sides by water - Puget Sound to the west
and Lake Washington to the east - and on three sides by mountains. In spite
of its rainy climate, it offers more accessible outdoor recreation than any
other US centre of comparable size.
Seattle itself is architecturally undistinguished, yet it has a very
attractive atmosphere. Its setting on steep hills next to water gives it a
character vaguely reminiscent of San Francisco.
Its downtown centre is simultaneously small enough to be manageable and
large enough to be reasonably sophisticated: it boasts an absurd number of
espresso coffee shops, some interesting Northwestern cuisine, excellent
bookshops and a plethora of art galleries, headed by the new,
architecturally bold Seattle Art Museum.
Somewhat improbably, it has also become the undisputed centre of pop music's
latest craze - grungerock. Rolling Stone magazine has just named the city
the 'new Liverpool'.
Nevertheless, Seattle remains neat, clean and unflashy, enjoying its
new-found wealth without flaunting it. 'This is a city of inconspicuous
consumption,' as one local writer puts it.
Prosperity has also changed Seattle's view of itself and America's view of
the city. Thirty years ago it was widely regarded as a dull provincial
backwater, physically isolated from the rest of the country and heavily
influenced by a dour Scandinavian heritage. Sir Thomas Beecham, the British
composer, called it a 'cultural dustbin'.
Today, it is seen as increasingly cosmopolitan, be it in terms of culture,
outlook or racial mix. In 1960, just 8 per cent of the city's population was
made up of minorities but the figure is now 25 per cent, thanks to strong
immigration during the 1980s by Asians, who now account for 11 per cent of
the population.
Throughout its history Seattle has looked to Asia for trade and cultural
ties and has developed unusually strong links with Japan - underlined
recently when a consortium led by Nintendo, the Japanese games company with
its US headquarters in Seattle, made a takeover bid for the city's baseball
team.
These links could prove increasingly important over the next decade as the
city aggressively markets its role as an East-West trading centre.
Yet Seattle is hardly Shangri-la. It has a high rate of violent crime, drugs
and Aids problems, homelessness (the term Skid Row originated here in the
19th Century), traffic congestion and concern over the quality of its air
and education.
However, many of these problems seem more manageable, or managed better,
than in many other US cities. For example, Seattle's initiatives for keeping
the homeless off the streets, involving a broad range of civic groups, have
been widely praised.
This sense of community is underlined in city politics, which involves a
high degree of policy input from strong neighbourhood interest groups.
Significantly, all city elections are by law non-partisan in nature,
although for the past two decades every mayor has been a member of the
Democratic party.
However, the mushrooming of suburbs in counties beyond the city limits means
that no amount of civic togetherness will allow Seattle alone to solve those
pressing questions which require regional solutions.
Among the most important of these are a host of inter-related transport
problems, including decisions on a new regional rail system and whether or
not to build a new run-way at Sea-Tac airport.
Seattle is hardly alone among American conurbations in grappling with
regional issues that transcend neat political boundaries. But because the
region remains relatively unspoilt, rather more hangs on it finding sensible
solutions.
