
By Congressional district
Alabama 6: Democratic incumbent Ben Erdreich was badly hurt by redistricting
but did better than expected, losing 53 per cent to 47 per cent to
Republican Spencer Bachus.
California 3: Redistricting cut Democrat Vic Fazio's majority to 51 per
cent, his lowest in 8 elections, but he averted a stiff challenge from an
anti-gun control Republican.
California 42: George Brown has rarely had an easy election, but the
chairman of the House science and technology committee survived the damage
caused by House bank overdrafts.
Georgia 3: Republican state legislator Mac Collins ousted incumbent Richard
Ray, who lost much of his old constituency when the district was redrawn.
Georgia 6: Outspoken Republican Newt Gingrich, top of the Democrats' hit
list, survived redistricting, bank overdrafts and a venomous campaign.
Iowa 2: Redistricting forced two incumbents into the same election, and
Republican Jim Nussle edged out Democrat Dave Nagle by just 3,390 votes.
Maine 2: Republican Olympia Snowe recovered to beat Democrat Patrick McGowan
for the second time, helped by a Green candidate drawing votes from her
opponent.
Maryland 1: Redistricting created an incumbent versus incumbent race -
Republican Wayne Gilchrest got the better of Democrat Tom McMillen.
Massachusetts 3: Incumbent Joe Early barely survived a Democratic primary
but, as one of the worst abusers of the House bank, he succumbed to
Republican Peter Blute.
Massachusetts 6: Republican Peter Torkildsen easily defeated incumbent
Nicholas Mavroules, indicted on racketeering, bribery and tax evasion
charges.
Missouri 6: Democratic state legislator Pat Danner ousted Tom Coleman,
senior Republican on the House agriculture committee.
Montana: Redistricting cut Montana to a single House seat; Democrat Pat
Williams defeated fellow incumbent Ron Marlenee.
New York 2: Republican Rick Lazio beat incumbent Tom Downey, who came to
Congress aged 25 in the post-Watergate wave and suffered from the
'Washington insider' label.
New York 14: Last of the liberal Republicans, Bill Green finally lost his
Manhattan Upper East Side district to Democratic city councilwoman Carolyn
Maloney.
Ohio 6: Republican Bob McEwen was a member of the powerful House rules
committee, but his House bank overdrafts dragged him to defeat at the hands
of Ted Strickland.
Ohio 10: Republican Martin Hoke easily beat Mary Rose Oakar, chair of three
House sub-committees but bloodied by her 213 House bank overdrafts.
Pennsylvania 19: Republican Bill Goodling was hurt by his 430 House bank
overdrafts, but won re-election as opposition split between Democrat Paul
Kilker and conservative independent Thomas Humbert.
Texas 2: Democrat Charles Wilson survived the label 'Good Time Charlie' and
held off Republican Donna Peterson, making the most of his clout on the
Appropriations Committee.
Texas 23: Hounded by a three-year FBI investigation and by House bank
overdrafts, Democratic incumbent Albert Bustamante lost this heavily
Democratic district to Republican TV executive Henry Bonilla.
Wisconsin 1: House armed services committee chairman Les Aspin came under
attack for paying more attention to world affairs than to his district, but
survived a Republican challenge.
