
Eight years ago, when political tensions were high and China's economic
reforms scarcely under way, the special economic zone of Xiamen booked 10
telephone calls a month to Taiwan, 200km away. Today, calls are averaging
60,000 a month and rising.
In 1987, when Taiwan lifted martial law and eased some restrictions on
dealings with China, fewer than 7,000 Taiwanese visited the mainland.
Bilateral trade, which can legally be conducted only through third
countries, was about USDollars 1.5bn (Pounds 877m). This year, with rules on
investment in China slowly being relaxed, more than 1m Taiwanese are
expected to visit. Bilateral trade through Hong Kong alone is likely to
exceed Dollars 6bn, while the total, including smuggling, will be closer to
Dollars 10bn.
Taiwanese light industrial and processing companies, faced with rising wages
and costs at home, have probably invested more than Dollars 3bn in China in
the last five years. About a third has gone into the city of Xiamen and
Fujian province and about the same is invested in Guangdong and Shenzhen,
China's most advanced special economic zone, across Kowloon Bay from Hong
Kong.
This explosion of economic activity has helped lift average wages in Xiamen
10 per cent per year since 1987. Taiwanese electronics, toy and garment
factories are springing up in and around Xiamen and along the Fujian coast.
In some areas, more than a quarter of workers are employed by Taiwan
companies.
Xiamen now resembles Shenzhen five years ago. Similar problems, such as
gambling, prostitution and corruption, are also emerging. But most Xiamen
residents seem to welcome home their Taiwanese tongbao, or compatriots, who
share language and often kinship ties.
Each morning Chinese peasants, often brought to Xiamen from poorer inland
provinces, file through the gates of the Xinglin Taiwanese investors zone.
Takamisawa Electric (Taiwan), which started trial production of magnetic
components earlier this year, employs about 70 young Chinese women on a
production line with machinery mostly imported from Japan.
Mr Lay Chuanlin, who moved to Xiamen from Taiwan to manage the factory, says
labour costs are about a tenth of those in Taiwan and productivity is
surprisingly high. By next year the company intends to add another three
production lines and employ 1,000 workers.
Although Taiwan's growing involvement in Fujian mirrors Hong Kong's
development of Guangdong since the early 1980s, Taiwanese companies face
different problems. China still regards Taiwan as a renegade province. It
refuses to recognise Taiwan's government and has not renounced its threat to
use military force to reunify Taiwan, especially if the island declares
independence.
These political concerns pose a host of problems and suggest moves towards
closer economic integration will be erratic at best. For example, neither
side recognises the other's legal system so no investment protection
guarantees are in place. Bans on direct shipping and air links and
restrictions on direct investment and banking also add to businesses' costs.
These are acceptable risks for low-cost manufacturers. who may face going
out of business if they stay in Taiwan. Their average investment is less
than Dollars 10m and some are also speculating on rising land prices.
Machinery, which has sometimes already been fully depreciated, can be moved
to China, where low wage and land costs allow healthy margins even after the
extra costs of political restrictions.
But for capital intensive industries the risks of investing in China are
significant. Investment guarantees can be secured via overseas subsidiaries,
but companies face legal and political problems. While Hong Kong companies
rush to build power stations and roads in Guangdong, Taiwanese investors
have so far shunned long-term infrastructure projects. Some heavy industries
such as petrochemicals will invest if offered sufficient incentives by
China, but progress is likely to be slow.
China's renewed commitment to coastal economic reform this year means it has
become even keener on attracting Taiwanese investment to provide jobs and
technology. Defence experts in Hong Kong and Taiwan suspect China's policy
of attacking the US while largely ignoring Taiwan over the recent F-16
fighter jet sale shows Beijing does not want to risk upseting Taiwanese
investors at this stage.
But growing Chinese links are worrying Taiwan's government. With 7 per cent
of the island's exports now officially destined for the mainland, the
government fears China is gaining a significant indirect influence over its
economy. Changes in China's economic policies, and its trade disputes with
the US, will now affect Taiwan for the first time.
Taiwan's ruling Kuomintang party has tried to stop large-scale investments
in China by reviewing them on a case by case basis. Defence industries will
not be allowed to leave, and strategic industries such as petrochemicals and
cement are being encouraged to invest in special preferential zones in
Taiwan. 'Whatever our businessmen do on the mainland, their roots should
remain in Taiwan,' said Kuomintang spokesman Mr James Chu.
So far the government has had mixed success. It claims it persuaded Formosa
Plastics, Taiwan's largest private company, to cancel plans to invest in
Xiamen. In fact Formosa probably delayed because China had not agreed to its
conditions. Other large companies, such as food manufacturer President, are
investing throughout China, and government officials admit privately they
cannot stop businessmen for long. 'Taiwan is meant to be a free country,'
one said.
The Taiwanese government therefore seems to have decided its ban on direct
shipping, air and postal links is its best chance of limiting investment.
China wants the ban lifted to increase investment and push reunification one
step closer. But Taiwan wants to keep maintain the ban, which is perhaps its
only hope of squeezing concessions from China in the future.
Meanwhile, China seems unwilling to play its own trump card - removing the
threat of force. Mr Chen Kongli, director of Taiwan research at Xiamen
University, said Taiwan had to make concessions before the threat would be
lifted. 'China's government also sees the threat as a way to suppress
Taiwan's independence movement,' he said.
Taiwan's Straits Exchange Foundation, set up to discuss issues such as
document verification and trade disputes with the Chinese, complains that
each time progress on improving the relationship between the two sides has
been close, China has raised unacceptable demands on sovereignty by claiming
there is only one China, thereby negating Taiwan's existence.
The problem became urgent earlier this year when three Taiwanese managers
were arrested by Chinese police following a fight at their factory. They
were later released without charge. 'Legal protection of Taiwanese people
and property remains very tenuous,' said Mr Chen Rong-jye, secretary-general
of the SEF.
