
SOUTH Korean officials are hoping that offers of economic aid made last week
will persuade North Korea to break the stalemate on the issue of nuclear
inspections.
North and South Korea signed reconciliation agreements last December,
including a ban on nuclear weapons. But talks on implemention of the pacts
have become bogged down.
Pyongyang is refusing to allow South Korean counterparts in Seoul to conduct
checks of suspected nuclear research facilities, which would complement
scheduled inspections already being made by the International Atomic Energy
Agency. In response, South Korea has frozen planned investments in North
Korea.
But with a presidential election in December, Seoul wants to find a
settlement by the autumn. The country's big business groups, some of which
are strong supporters of the ruling Democratic Liberal Party, are growing
impatient at the delay in entering North Korea. By inviting Mr Kim Dal-hyon,
the North Korean deputy prime minister, to tour industrial facilities in
South Korea last week, Seoul wanted to underscore to Pyongyang that it has
much to gain economically if it makes a concession on the nuclear issue.
Mr Kim is believed to be one of few senior North Korean officials receptive
to Seoul's offer. His position as trade minister and chairman of the
External Economic Committee has led to his support for opening the country
to foreign investment and expanding trade to bolster the troubled North
Korean economy. He is also a nephew of Kim Il-sung, the North Korean leader.
Talks on economic co-operation will continue. Mr Choi Gak-kyu, head of the
Economic Planning Board, the most powerful economic agency in Seoul, is
expected to travel soon to North Korea. Seoul will also send a study team,
consisting of representatives from leading Korean companies, to examine the
location of a proposed industrial complex in the port city of Nampo,
south-west of Pyongyang.
South Korean companies are interested in investing in North Korea because of
its skilled, but cheap, labour and its raw materials, including minerals
such as zinc. At present there is no South Korean investment in North Korea.
Daewoo has taken the lead in building contacts with the north over the Nampo
complex and Mr Kim Woo Choong, the Daewoo chairman, recently met Mr Kim in
Moscow to discuss construction of a natural gas pipeline from Russia Korea.
Samsung and Lucky-Goldstar have trade relations with North Korea and import
textiles and raw materials.
Hyundai's interest in North Korea has cooled following an aborted attempt to
forge economic ties in 1989 when Mr Chung Ju-yung, the Hyundai chairman,
visited Pyongyang. Plans for Hyundai to develop a holiday resort area and a
ship repair yard floundered after objections by Seoul. Hyundai also angered
North Korea by seeking timber concessions in the Russian Far East, also
sought by Pyongyang.
Despite the recent freeze on economic relations trade links between the two
countries, which were formalised in April 1991, increased by 31 per cent to
Dollars 106.9m (Pounds 55.9m) during the first half of 1992. All but Dollars
8.8m consisted of North Korean exports, largely fisheries products and raw
materials, such as minerals.
If the deadlock is resolved, the next likely goal will be the conclusion of
talks on double taxation and investment guarantees by North Korea.
