
SOUTH Korea is this year set to overtake the UK as New Zealand's fourth
largest trading partner, according to Mr Philip Burdon, the country's
Minister of Commerce.
The shift marks the increasing importance to New Zealand of trade in Asia,
where the country has 'a geographical advantage in servicing the dynamic
expansion of Asia's economies,' Mr Burdon noted.
Mr Burdon was speaking in London ahead of a seminar on Trade and Investment
in New Zealand. He attacked British business for missing investment
opportunities there, and complained that many in the UK retain a time-warped
impression of New Zealand as a 1950s-style appendage of the UK economy.
Over the past 20 years, in which New Zealand's farm products have been
progressively excluded from the EC market, Mr Burdon noted that Europe's
share of New Zealand exports has fallen from 49 per cent to 18 per cent. The
UK share has slumped from 36 per cent in 1970 to just 7 per cent in 1991. At
the same time, North America's share has fallen from 20 to 15 per cent.
Simultaneously, exports to Asia have leapt from 12 per cent to 36 per cent
of exports, which in 1991 totalled a provisional NZDollars 15.15bn (Pounds
4.8bn). Japan is now, after Australia, New Zealand's leading export market,
with South Korea fifth and Taiwan, Malaysia and Hong Kong close behind. Mr
Burdon noted that South Korea buys no butter or fruit from New Zealand,
though these remain a large share of New Zealand's exports to the UK.
'We have moved from being a highly protected economy to a market economy
that complements the industrial strengths of Asia's growing economies,' Mr
Burdon said. 'Asia offers enormous opportunities to countries like ours. The
reconstructed NZ economy offers major investment opportunities in key
sectors like timber and fishing.'
These have attracted no UK investment. But investment in New Zealand from
Pacific region countries had been growing rapidly, Investment from Singapore
has grown from NZDollars 85m in 1990 to NZDollars 1.8bn in 1991. Mr Burdon
said the economy needed inward investment of about NZDollars 8bn over the
next decade.
