
BRITAIN has suffered, survived and vowed never to repeat its early-1980s
attempts at pursuing precise domestic monetary targets. No mainstream
political party describes itself as monetarist; all parties are committed to
continued membership of the European exchange rate mechanism; and all appear
resigned to the current combination of high interest rates and rising
unemployment.
Yet the current framework of UK economic policy-making remains similar to
the one that prolonged the 1980-81 recession. UK interest rates are again
very high even though the economy has been in recession for over a year and
inflation has fallen to European levels. What distinguishes the new-style
monetarism is its international flavour. UK monetary policy is once more
determined by an elusive broad money target; but the target is now set in
Frankfurt.
German broad money growth determines UK interest rates, and not vice versa,
because of the Bundesbank's anti-inflation credibility. The D-Mark has never
been devalued within the ERM, and no member country has ever managed to
reduce its interest rates below those of Germany. The pan-European interest
rate floor, set by the Bundesbank, has risen over the past two years as
inflationary pressures have built up in Germany following unification. The
fiscal deficit, tax increases and the generous terms of monetary unification
have all fuelled bank lending and wage and price inflation. In December, the
Bundesbank raised German interest rates and revised its target range for
annual broad money growth to 3.5-5.5 per cent. Yet M3 rose by an annualised
9 per cent in January, up from 5.8 per cent in December.
Interest rates across Europe stay uncomfortably high as a result. Moreover,
Europe's monetary policy will remain tight for some time, despite sluggish
economic growth outside Germany. Mr Helmut Schlesinger, Bundesbank
president, last week reaffirmed its commitment to the current monetary
target zone and demanded an immediate clampdown on German credit expansion.
But M3 is not expected to dip back into its new target zone this year, as
the right-hand side of the chart shows. Inflation in Germany and slow growth
elsewhere make German money supply an inappropriate target for European
monetary policy. Does the broad money target make sense for Germany?
Monetary targets are only a good guide for policy if the relationship
between money and inflation is stable and predictable. The relationship has
been more stable in Germany than in other industrialised countries over the
past decade. But the recent UK experience counsels caution.
Domestic monetarism in Britain collapsed because the government tried to
target broad money growth just when an apparently stable relationship
between money and inflation was breaking down. The abolition of exchange
controls and supplementary special deposits in 1979-80 raised the proportion
of national income that the public wanted to hold in broad money assets. The
growth rate of Pounds M3 duly shot out of its new target range, as the chart
shows, even though inflation had already begun to fall.
Could German broad money growth also be over-shooting because the
relationship between the money stock and nominal income is shifting? One
reason why this might be so is that the D-Mark is being used as a parallel
currency elsewhere in eastern Europe. That would increase the demand for
broad money without fuelling German inflation. But non-bank deposits have
risen at least as fast as currency in circulation.
Another reason why the demand for broad money might have risen is the
proposed change to the taxation of interest income later this year. This may
have prompted investors to sell non-money assets and hold their savings in
cash and other broad money deposits. Meanwhile, east Germans are still in
the process of switching their broad money holdings into other non-money
assets.
All of which makes German money demand unpredictable, and the Bundesbank's
current task particularly difficult. A slavish devotion to fixed monetary
targets would be risky, as the UK experience has demonstrated. The rest of
Europe has little choice other than to trust the Bundesbank's judgement.
