
Dubai has never been simply a Gulf oil town. Although oil money has
fertilised its fast growth in the past 25 years, in character it has always
kept much more the feel of a traders' haven.
Oil and gas, in fact, came later to Dubai than most Gulf states and, when it
was discovered and exploited in the late 1960s, there was less of it. The
emirate's reserves of 4bn barrels of recoverable oil are modest by the
standards of some Gulf peers and dwarfed by the 98bn barrels beneath the
sands of Abu Dhabi, its rival emirate down the coast.
By most estimates, Dubai's oil will run out within the next 20 or so years,
barring large finds which oil industry executives in the city presume
unlikely. The impetus behind Dubai's economy is therefore the government's
determination to diversify the emirate's sources of income as fast and
ambitiously as possible. Otherwise, as a local banker puts it: 'when the oil
dries up, so will Dubai.'
While it lasts, Dubai is pumping oil for all it is worth and, with
characteristic distaste for any external restraints on its behaviour,
pumping to capacity regardless of any Opec quotas for the United Arab
Emirates as a whole. At present, the emirate is lifting around 440,000
barrels a day.
Rather than nurture its oil endowment, a policy which Dubai's rulers have
decided would only postpone slightly a far less prosperous future, Dubai has
instead tended to reap what it can now, to invest in ventures which will
sustain its buoyancy when the wells dry up. The emirate's non-oil sector
already accounts for around 60 per cent of its gross national product, which
stood at Dh123bn last year - although this proportion varies somewhat
according to the prevailing oil price.
But Dubai's oil income has always been disproportionately important as the
wellspring of its investment strategy. This, broadly put, amounts to pouring
money, marketing and as much imagination as it can muster into making it an
unavoidable trading hub for the Middle East, and preferably somewhat beyond -and the region's most desirable place to set up manufacturing plants.
In this ambition, Dubai has been blessed both by location and tradition. In
the days of dhows and steamers, Dubai's natural creek quickly became the
Gulf's busiest port in the late nineteenth-century, soon after it was
settled by a branch of the Bani Yas tribe, led by the Maktoum family, who
still rule Dubai. With the advent of air travel, Dubai found itself
conveniently sited midway between Europe and Asia and, offering cheap
aviation fuel, a natural stopover point. Last year, 4.4m passengers used its
airport; an average of 12,000 daily.
In the early days, moreover, the Maktoums' liberal hospitality offered to a
large number of Arabs and Persians across the waters a more profitable home
from which to trade than Persia itself, which imposed severe restrictions on
trade in the early 1900s. These merchants, later joined by hundreds from
India and the sub-continent, still form the core of Dubai's thriving
merchant class which has defined the city's character.
Trade with Iran, the porous coastline and closed economy of which helped
turn Dubai into a bustling smuggler's nest, helped keep Dubai's port alive
after the demise of the pearling industry in the late 1920s. Gold, food and
all manner of other goods also found their way from Dubai's creek to the
ports of India, Pakistan and to other Gulf ports.
But with the arrival of oil, and a boom which saw Dubai's population double
between 1967 and 1973 to 120,000 people, high-rise buildings began to spring
up amid the palm-frond houses. The city state's late ruler, Sheikh Rashid
bin Maktoum, began to define the longer-term strategy carried on today by
his sons.
In an infrastructural binge during the late 1960s and 1970s, the man-made
Port Rashid was opened in 1972, bridges were built over the creek, the
airport expanded and, in 1979, Dubai created the 67-berth deepwater harbour
of Jebel Ali, 30km south of Dubai complete with an enveloping 100 sq km free
trade zone, opened in 1985, in which foreign companies could operate as 100
per cent owners - virtually unprecedented in the region - and pay no tax,
repatriate all profits and also profit from cheap land, labour and power.
The result has been to turn Dubai into far and away the Gulf's busiest
trading centre. Between them, Port Rashid and Jebel Ali - which combined
under the single Dubai Ports Authority (DPA) in a rationalisation last year -handled 1.25m teu (20-foot equivalent units - essentially containers),
making DPA the world's 19th busiest container port.
Japan, the biggest purchaser of Dubai's oil and its main supplier of cars
and electronics goods, is the emirate's main trading partner, but the
greater part of Dubai's imports are then re-exported, predominantly to Iran
and, to a lesser extent, elsewhere in the Arabian Peninsular. Dubai
officially accounts for 60-70 per cent of the United Arab Emirates'
re-exports, a figure which most likely underestimates the true picture,
given that many of its imports are also re-exported by other emirates.
Dubai also opened a 25,000 sq metre air cargo village in July last year to
corner the region's sea-air freight business and is intent on chasing
Seattle's crown as the world's fastest and busiest sea-air freight terminal.
In keeping with its determination to become the region's unavoidable hub,
Dubai also set up Emirates, its own airline, in 1985 - a move met with some
scepticism given that Gulf Air, jointly owned by Oman, Qatar, Bahrain and
Abu Dhabi, was already well established in the region. But such scepticism
has not deterred the airline from a sustained pattern of growth which in
June saw it sign deals to add seven Boeing 777s to its present fleet of 11
aircraft, with an option on seven more, and with a further five Airbus jets
due for delivery from July. Although the airline publishes no figures, its
managers insist it is already returning an operating profit.
While Dubai has soared away from its local competitors as a trading centre,
it has had the same mixed success as elsewhere in the region in attracting
manufacturing investment.
On its own initiative, Dubai created the Dubal aluminium smelter - one of a
growing number in the Gulf where low-cost energy makes sense of such
ventures - which last year neared its expansion target output of 240,000
tonnes a year.
But while Jebel Ali, into which the government invested Dollars 2.5bn, had
attracted 410 companies by June this year and was registering new entrants
at the rate of 10-12 a month, the majority are either distribution or
packaging companies or attendant light industries. Jebel Ali is still
waiting for a big multinational investor to select the free zone as a big
manufacturing base.
Jebel Ali has not turned out to be the white elephant some critics branded
it at its conception. Nevertheless it has far to go before it fulfils Sheikh
Rashid's forward-looking ambition. Just over 5 per cent of its space is
taken up so far and, although the zone has capacity to absorb 8,000
companies, Mr Sultan bin Sulayem, the DPA chairman, says the port reckons
conservatively that there will be 2,000 in place by the turn of the century.
As to why no leading multinational has yet taken the plunge at Jebel Ali, Mr
Sulayem suggests that it is simply a question of 'awareness' - too few
companies have yet focused on the potential of the region, he argues. Dubai
is moving heaven, and large quantities of earth, to try to rectify the
problem.
Not only has the government set up the Dubai Commerce and Tourism Board, now
represented in seven foreign cities, to market the city energetically, the
emirate has also sought to attract world class sporting events - such as the
Dubal Desert Classic golf tournament, the first round of the PGA circuit,
world-ranking car rallies and snooker competitions - to draw the attention
of potential investors.
The city's two grassed golf courses, the second of which will soon be
completed along the banks of Dubai's creek and the first of which was the
also the first of its kind in the region, have been built primarily to help
attract foreign investors. The emirate's rulers know well how much Japanese
businessmen like to play golf.
Yet awareness of what Dubai has to offer - and besides golf, it also has
perhaps the most liberal and pro-business government in the Gulf - may not
be enough to guarantee the kind of investment the emirate needs to escape
the shackle of diminishing oil revenues. Japanese investors, for example,
also like cheap labour and while the predominantly Asian workers abundant in
Dubai cost far less than in any developed country, they are more expensive
to hire in Dubai than in Asia itself where Japanese companies prefer to
invest anyway for their own cultural reasons.
Another uncertain cloud over Dubai's development is the future of Iran,
which, having gratefully used the emirate's busy services as an entrepot
throughout the Iran-Iraq war and since, is now rather ungratefully trying to
develop its own duty-free and development zones at Qeshm and Kish Islands,
near the Straits of Hormuz.
The recent reshuffling of Iran's exchange rates has already hurt some of
Dubai's traders and opinion in the city is mixed as to the likely effects on
Dubai of Iran's determination to open its economy and develop its own trade.
Either you believe that this will irrevocably reduce trade with the
emirate's biggest single market, or that a bigger, more prosperous Iranian
economy can only, even with a smaller Dubai share, mean more trade for the
emirate. Last year, for instance, re-exports to Iran rose 8 per cent by
value, but fell 19 per cent by volume.
The jury is out on that, as with the eventual success or otherwise of
Dubai's strenuous attempts to replace its oil revenues. But Dubai cannot be
blamed for not trying.
