
THE Conservatives have won the general election during a recession that is
already the longest Britain has suffered since World War Two. And although
there are indications of an upturn in the economy later this year,
unemployment is expected to rise further. As a result, many more people are
likely to face acute financial difficulties.
These changed circumstances are not confined only to those at the bottom of
the income scale. Many professionals, particularly those in the City, have
been made redundant. Others who still have a job are all too aware that
their future is uncertain. But for people worried about meeting their bills,
there are measures that can be taken.
Draw up a budget. While this sounds obvious, it is essential. You must have
an idea of your disposable income and where it is going. Financial planners
suggest breaking it down into essential spending (mortgage, utility bills),
marginal (needing a new washing machine or car), and dispensable (holidays,
newspapers). Try to remember direct debits for which you no longer have a
record but which are leaving your account at regular intervals; you could be
paying for non-essential goods or subscriptions. The budget is also useful
if you intend seeing your mortgage lender to negotiate reduced payments.
Reduce your debts. This might sound demanding at a time when you fear a loss
of income, but take the chance while you can afford it to pay off debts that
charge high interest such as store cards, credit cards and overdrafts.
This is also not the time to buy a house you can only just afford, or to
take on long-term, inflexible investment policies.
Take out redundancy cover. This is pricey but could be worth it if you think
you are in serious danger of losing your job, since it will cover your
mortgage payments for a time. Unfortunately, the recession has meant that
lenders have been making these policies more expensive while reducing the
length of cover.
Robert Noble-Warren, of fee-based financial adviser Murray Noble, says the
cheapest time to take out cover is when you arrange a mortgage. Typically,
this adds up to 2 or 3 per cent of your monthly mortgage repayments from a
bank or building society, but as much as 6 per cent from a broker.
Peter Smith of Hill Martin, a fee-based adviser specialising in retirement
and redundancy planning, advises shopping around for cover. He also suggests
checking the policy to make sure that it is not confined to specific
situations (for example, you might find you have to resign) or whether it
applies only to those drawing unemployment benefit, for which you might be
ineligible.
If you are about to be made redundant, consider the following:
Terms of redundancy. You might think you have no control over this but Smith
emphasises that, if you are a senior employee, your employer's desire to get
you off his books means you could well find your redundancy conditions are
highly negotiable.
Smith says you should refuse to be pressured into signing anything until you
have had time to marshal your arguments. It is worth consulting a solicitor
who specialises in this area, particularly if you feel your redundancy was
unfair, because the construction of the final package will have legal and
tax implications.
Redundancy pay. Only the first Pounds 30,000 is tax-free. If you are sure
you have enough income from savings, you could consider asking the company
to pay amounts over this level into your pension scheme; this way, you avoid
paying tax on them. But this can be done only by your employer.
Otherwise, if your outlook is uncertain, the best way of investing the money
is in an instant-access, high-interest bank or building society account. If
you are married, ensure you use up both personal allowances.
This is not the time to tie up cash in insurance bonds or endowments unless
you are sure you have enough income to sustain you until you find another
job. A fee-based financial adviser should give unbiased counsel; most
independent advisers earn their living through commission on the products
they sell you.
Unemployment benefit. If you are a redundant professional, it might not
occur to you to register as unemployed. But there are two advantages in
doing so. You will not have to pay National Insurance contributions and
could draw unemployment benefit if eligible. But it is not worth registering
if you are 55 or over, since your pension would be offset against benefit.
Smith advises those who think they might be eligible for sickness benefit
not to register as unemployed. Unlike unemployment benefit, sickness benefit
is not taxable and is transformed into a disability benefit after six
months; this can also have an earnings-related supplement.
Pensions. Do not allow yourself to be sold a personal pension unless you are
sure it will be to your advantage, warns Smith; he says you could be
substituting 'final salary certainty for a money purchase hope.' The
alternative is to leave your pension with the company and take it as a
deferred pension.
If you do leave a company scheme which provided you with life cover and
permanent health insurance, you will need to take these out yourself until
you find a new job. Those who are ill or smokers could find this expensive,
but Smith points out that you might be able to obtain continuation cover
from a company scheme, in which case you would not need to have a medical.
This has to be done before leaving the scheme or within a month of it.
If you have share options, you will need to exercise them within a similarly
tight time frame.
Mortgages: Since the Tories came to power in 1979, mortgage debt has gone
from about 30 per cent of personal disposable income to more than 70 per
cent. This is the largest monthly commitment for most people and, unlike the
clothes or food bills, cannot readily be reduced. If you are worried about
payments, the Building Societies Association advises you to see your lender.
What it decides will depend on the level of your difficulties. The most
common solution, according to the BSA, is to accept lower monthly payments -
sometimes by as much as 50 per cent.
But those with endowment mortgages are likely to find these inflexible in
such a situation. The endowment gives bad value if cashed-in early, so try
not to surrender it if this can be avoided.
If you are in dire straits, your lender might suggest taking a share in the
value of the house in exchange for lower monthly payments. The disadvantage,
of course, is that you will no longer be entitled to all of any future
growth in value.
In the worst case, you might have to consider a mortgage-to-rent scheme.
These vary between lenders; but a common method is to sell the house to a
housing association, enabling you to become a tenant and to qualify for
housing benefit.
You could be eligible for income support to cover mortgage interest
payments, but you must be out of work to qualify. Usually, this would pay
half the monthly interest for the first 16 weeks of unemployment and the
full amount after that.
Savings and investments. In general, it is better not to touch longer-term
investments, such as endowments or five-year National Savings schemes, since
your return for early surrender will be low. Unit trust or investment trust
savings plans normally can be stopped without penalty. Cancel the direct
debit and notify the company that you are stopping the scheme temporarily.
If you cannot afford your 25-year endowment policy but it has run for more
than seven years, you might get a better return by selling it to a
marketmaker or at auction rather than surrendering it to the insurance
company. Check first with the company how much the surrender value would be,
and compare this with the auctioneer's reserve value.
If you do not want to encash it but cannot afford the premiums, your lender
might allow you to take a premium holiday; otherwise, you could consider
making the policy 'paid-up' - in which case you would pay no more and wait
for the amount invested already to mature.
