
There are two sides to weight control: calories eaten, and calories burned
up. The only way to lose weight permanently is to strike a balance between
the two.
But the realities of business life are heavily stacked against balance of
any sort. It is too easy to get locked into a pattern of dumping an
increasing number of calories on to a system that is increasingly sedentary.
Most business meals are large and laden with fat, sugar and alcohol.
They are also eaten under stressful conditions, late in the evening and on
the run in hotels, aeroplanes and conferences.
This recipe for chronic fatigue and overweight is followed by hundreds of
thousands of managers around the world. The morbid results are high blood
pressure, diabetes, heart disease, blood cholesterol, not to mention
shattered self-confidence.
Once the warning lights start flashing, you go to the doctor and get put on
a diet. Unfortunately, most diets employ draconian methods - and are
scientifically dubious to boot - making them a short-term success, but a
long-term disaster.
This is because they concentrate exclusively on how many calories are going
in (to be discussed in the next Health Check). They ignore the key
ingredient for long-term success: your metabolic rate, or the number of
calories used up by your body every day.
When your doctor tells you that you are overweight your knee-jerk reaction
is probably to go on a diet, perhaps skip a few meals, cancel that lunch
reservation at your favourite restaurant. But to do that will send the wrong
message to your body.
The body does not know you are skipping lunch because you want to lose
weight. Its survival mechanisms will be alerted to an imminent famine and it
will slow down the metabolism to conserve energy.
It will even prepare to use its own muscle protein as a calorie source. If
you spend lunchtime sitting still at your desk, your metabolism will be
reduced further.
So how can you increase your metabolic rate in a safe and practical way?
The good news is that you need to eat - but eat wisely. Shift the bulk of
your daily calories to earlier in the day, when your metabolism is higher
and you can handle the calorie load.
The overwhelming majority of executives that I see every year report that
they consume 60 per cent or more of their daily calorie intake at dinner.
The only possible message to the body is to store those calories as fat.
There is nothing wrong with having snacks between meals. Eating nuts,
wholewheat biscuits or fruit maintains the metabolic rate and keeps the
level of blood sugar constant.
Exercise is also important, but there is no need to don the sneakers and
sprint round the park. Mild exercise can increase your metabolic rate,
particularly after meals. Leave the table 15 minutes earlier and walk
briskly back to the office. Recent research shows that for every 15 minutes
of brisk walking after a meal, your metabolic rate will remain high for 30
minutes, while you are back at the office sitting in front of the computer.
That is high leverage.
Do not wait for that imaginary weekend or vacation to come when you begin to
eat sensibly and play a strenuous game of tennis. You did not get into this
situation overnight, you are not going to get out of it overnight either: so
start now.
