
Sir, I read with interest the article by Christopher Lorenz ('Japan should
give the locals a chance', November 15) and Mr Mike Parr's letter (November
22). As a British expatriate manager working in a large Japanese company, I
agree with many of Mr Lorenz's comments and sympathise with much of Mr
Parr's experience.
However, neither of these views provides a complete picture. In my role as
manager, planning and industrial relations team, I have struggled, with my
Japanese colleagues, to foster greater understanding between worldwide
cultures and the Japanese corporate culture. Our successes have not so far
been spectacular, but the learning process most certainly has been.
Any solution lies somewhere between the Lorenz/Parr extremes. It is a myth
that Japanese people live only to work. It is a fact that Japanese people
have the same hopes, fears, and aspirations as the average 'westerner', and
quite openly speak out in their frustration at corporate policies.
It is more than possible to build trust and confidence, and varying degrees
of power, albeit usually manifested in influence rather than authority,
through normal and honest labour. I was recruited in the UK in 1986 and
during the next five years worked hard, but no harder than I did in the
British company where I was previously employed. My office time averaged
between 9 and 10 hours each day, and after-hours 'networking' in bars was
necessary only once a week on average. I saw my family far more frequently
than my Japanese colleagues; and I did not need to learn Japanese until last
year.
Finally, success within Japanese Kaisha depends very much on expatriates'
willingness to 'pioneer' from within to encourage change; determination to
succeed; sensitivity towards others; communication skills; and an ability to
balance persistence with patience.
Given these, I am certain the next decade will see greater penetration of
locals into the Japanese corporate hierarchy. Barry Chester,
Mitsubishi Corporation,
6-3 Marunouchi 2-Chome,
Chiyoda-Ku, Tokyo 100-86.
