
'I AM either on the phone or away from my desk. Please leave a message after
the tone. To reach my assistant, press 'One'. To reach an operator press
'Zero'. To skip this message in the future, press the '****' key.'
If you are a regular caller to companies in the US this type of greeting,
played by 'voice messaging' or 'voice mail' systems, is already familiar. It
provides an efficient - if somewhat irritating and impersonal - means of
communication.
In its basic form, voice messaging is merely a computerised answering
service that records and replays telephone messages. However, the latest
systems integrate voice with facsimile and electronic mail, transforming the
telephone into a multimedia communications terminal.
Voice mail is a technology that Americans love to hate, but they are using
it in ever-increasing numbers. An estimated one-third of all large- and
medium-sized companies in the US already use voice messaging and many
residential telephone users also have access to voice mail services provided
by regional telephone companies.
'Ten or 15 years ago, if you called someone and got an answering machine you
wondered who that person was trying to avoid speaking to. Today, if a call
is not answered by a person or machine, you wonder the same thing. Who are
they trying to avoid?' says George Sollman, president and chief executive of
Centigram, an early leader in the voice messaging systems market. 'That
shows the extent to which we have adapted to the technology.'
Not so in Europe and Asia, however, where sales of voice messaging systems
have been slower to take off, in part, it seems, because there is more
resistance to talking to machines. In Europe, there are also regulatory
hurdles. It takes about six months and costs about Dollars 500,000 (Pounds
280,000) to obtain approval from a European PTT (national telephone company)
to connect a voice messaging system to the phone network, says Douglas
Chance, president of Octel Communications, the largest US supplier of voice
messaging systems.
Yet as Octel and other voice messaging system manufacturers step up their
international marketing efforts, voice mail appears set to become more
widely accepted. Voice mail is catching on in Europe as a service for users
of car phones. The system picks up messages while the user is not in the car
or when the telephone is turned off.
In the US, however, voice mail is viewed primarily as a productivity tool,
especially among the many companies that are 'downsizing' and cutting
support staff. With fewer secretaries to take messages, the voice mail
system ensures that calls do not go unanswered.
Unlike the standard answering machine, a voice mail system picks up calls
when you are already on the telephone. Most systems also give callers a
generous amount of time to record their message and the opportunity to
review what they have said.
Perhaps the biggest advantage of voice mail is that it eliminates 'telephone
tag'. If the other party is 'on the phone or away from my desk' it is always
possible to leave a message. As people get used to the system they leave
more substantive messages and no longer feel the need to talk directly to
one other.
Messages that are too complicated, or too sensitive, to be relayed by a
third party can also be delivered in confidence to a 'voice mail box'.
Companies with international operations find voice messaging a more personal
alternative to electronic-mail or facsimile for sending messages across time
zones. Hotels are beginning to install voice mail as a service to guests, so
that callers are able to leave accurate, confidential messages in any
language.
Voice messaging services can also provide a communications lifeline in
emergency situations. Following the devastating explosions that destroyed
the Reforma district of Guadalajara, Mexico, earlier this year, Telefonos de
Mexico (Telmex) swiftly transformed its corporate 'voice mail' service into
an emergency message system.
In normal circumstances, however, voice messaging simply provides improved
communications capabilities. The full potential of voice messaging is just
beginning to emerge with the introduction of 'voice processing systems' that
allow users to access a wide range of services over the telephone.
The caller can tap into broadcast news services, retrieve and update
computer database records, initiate or receive facsimile and electronic mail
messages, and even have them read by a computer generated voice.
Sollman describes how a voice processing 'power call' works. He is on a
business trip. A call to his voice mail box alerts him to an urgent fax sent
to the office, which is then 'read' to him by the Centigram system. A
customer wants a quotation on a customised voice messaging system.
Having listened to the message, he taps in the fax number of the hotel where
he is staying and a copy is automatically routed to him. The customer's
request requires immediate attention and several people on Sollman's staff
need to be alerted.
From his hotel room telephone, Sollman records a voice mail annotation
urging action on the customer's request. He sends the message and the
original fax to a pre-determined list of colleagues by pressing a few keys
on the phone.
Voice processing can similarly provide links with electronic mail and
computer databases or information services. Interactive voice response
systems, which enable the caller to speak directly to a computer and be
understood, also promise to broaden the applications of voice processing.
Each of the leading voice processing systems manufacturers has its own
specialty. Centigram has taken a lead in the use of computerised 'text to
speech' translation.
Octel is offering features that turn the touchtone telephone keys into a
primitive keyboard to type facsimile messages, select news or traffic
reports and post electronic mail messages. VMX, another voice messaging
systems company, is building a broad range of applications by encouraging
third-party software developers to write programs for its systems.
Voice messaging specialists are, however, facing increased competition from
manufacturers of private branch exchange equipment such as AT&T, Northern
Telecom and Rolm, which are offering voice messaging as an adjunct to their
PBX systems.
And although voice processing systems manufacturers claim that their
products are complementary to computer network systems, it seems certain
that the two industry segments will eventually collide.
While voice processing systems are beginning to access data processing
systems, computers are acquiring many of the attributes of voice processing
including 'business audio' features that enable the user to record spoken
messages and incorporate them in text and graphics documents.
Talking to machines may still be an uncomfortable experience for many, but
by the end of the decade it is likely to be commonplace. Worse, it seems
that these computerised systems will increasingly talk back to us. Perhaps
the only consolation is that when talking to computers we can be as rude as
we please without causing offence.
