
THE central Yugoslav republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina appealed yesterday to Mr
Cyrus Vance, the United Nations envoy, to send international peace-keeping
troops there as soon as possible.
The request was made in Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia-Hercegovina, where
Mr Vance was holding talks between the Yugoslav federal army and
representatives from the Croatian government.
Both sides discussed how federal army troops could be withdrawn from
Croatia, and how a ceasefire could be implemented.
Sending peace-keeping forces is conditional upon a lasting ceasefire in
Croatia.
Mr Rusmir Mahmutcehajic, deputy prime minister of Bosnia, said troops should
also be sent to Bosnia, 'not only to preserve the peace, but to preserve the
territorial integrity of the republic'.
Last month, Bosnian Serbs, led by Mr Radovan Karadzic, declared a 'Serbian
Bosnia' in a move which confirmed suspicions that certain Serb-inhabited
regions of the republic would try to form the boundaries of a greater
Serbia.
Bosnia, despite Serbia's opposition, has, along with the republics of
Slovenia, Croatia, and Macedonia, asked for recognition by the European
Community. The EC will grant this on January 15, subject to respect for
human and ethnic rights, and no forcible change of any of the republics'
frontiers.
Bosnian Moslem officials yesterday said they feared that any carve-up of the
republic between Serbia and Croatia would lead to bloodshed between its
three largest ethnic communities of Moslems, Serbs and Croats.
The 734,000 Croats, organised under the Bosnian equivalent of Croatia's
ruling Croatian Democratic Union, are divided between those living in
western Hercegovina, who are considering long-term unity with Croatia, and
those in multi-ethnic communities in the republic who want to retain its
unity.
Bosnian officials want peace-keeping troops to be based around, among other
areas, Mostar, in the south of the republic which has been used as a base
for federal army attacks on the Croatian resort of Dubrovnik.
