
They call it 'voice mail jail' - an automated telephonic maze that traps
callers and foils their efforts to reach a mere mortal. It has become one of
the daily hazards of business life in the US and it is what gives voice mail
a bad name. Everyone has horror stories about voice mail. Here is a small
sampling:
Calling a software company for the first time, the voice mail system
answers: press 'One' if you know the extension of the person you are
calling, press 'Two' to reach the person by name. This presents something of
a problem if you know neither the extension or the name, but want to speak
to the marketing manager. Undaunted, you press a few keys in the hope of
raising a response. Sure enough, a phone starts ringing, but the person is
unavailable and you now have the option of leaving a message for an unknown
party or following instructions on how to reach his assistant. Choosing the
latter, and beginning to feel frustrated, you reach yet another voice mail
message, and a third and so on. You are in voice mail jail.
Some voice mail systems are horribly complicated, presenting you with a
blizzard of options. Government agencies are among the worst. Calling the
'Ask Immigration' line at the Los Angeles Immigration and Naturalisation
Service is an experience guaranteed to persuade some would-be immigrants to
go home. There are more than 20 different options that callers can select,
including one to hear instructions on how to arrange to talk to an
immigration officer - but not by telephone.
Pity General Motors employees in Missouri if they cannot get to work on
time. After ploughing through three sets of voice mail choices they reach a
recording: 'Please indicate the reason for being late or absent. Press 'One'
for personal illness; press 'Two' if this is a family-related illness;
'Three' for car trouble; 'Four' for personal business; 'Five' if you've
overslept; 'Six' if this is court-related; 'Seven' if death related; 'Eight'
if weather related.' But what if it is plumbing related, or just not related
to any of the options given? 'You will NOT be switched to an operator,' the
recording warns sternly.
Nevertheless, there are steps you can take to avoid 'voice mail jail'. Most
systems give you a chance to listen again to lists of options. Choose
carefully. If you decide that you have gone off track and are not likely to
reach the right party or their designate, hang up and start again.
Back-tracking is almost impossible.
The best systems always give you a chance to press 'Zero' for an operator.
If you are not sure who you need to reach or cannot fathom how to use the
voice mail system this is the best option.
