
IT IS always an accolade for a family of plants to have a book devoted
entirely to it. This has just happened with Hemerocallis, Day Lilies, the
simple title of Walter Erhardt's new book published by Batsford (Pounds
17.99).
Such specialist books can prosper only when there is a considerable body of
interest in the plants and, although the sale of day lilies in Britain must
still be minute compared with the US, many people do grow them. With the
introduction of new colours and better performance, that number is likely to
increase, for day lilies are easy to manage.
The main thing holding back expansion in the UK is the reluctance of the big
commercial producers of hardy herbaceous perennials to grow more than a few
(mostly old) varieties. For almost anything new, you must search among the
small specialist nurseries, of which there are a dozen or so for day lilies.
The existence of the Plant Finder has made this task much easier.
There are also three national collections of hemerocallis which are spaced
out nicely. One is in the south-west at Antony House, Tor Point, Cornwall, a
National Trust property. Two others are in public parks - one at East Court
House, Ewell, Surrey, and the other under the control of Leeds city
council's department of leisure services, 19 Wellington Street, Leeds, West
Yorkshire.
Perhaps most useful of all is the excellent permanent trial of day lilies in
the Royal Horticultural Society's garden at Wisley, Surrey, where awards are
given for garden excellence and the naming is very good.
It is no surprise to learn that day lilies have been grown for centuries in
Chinese gardens, for they originate in Asia and Chinese gardeners always
have been quick to pick up good plants. But day lilies have been grown in
the UK since the 16th century, so Britons have had time to get used to them.
The trouble is that the wild species are not themselves particularly
exciting. It is the increasingly complex hybrids made from them, largely in
America, that are most attractive. There is now a bewildering array of
varieties which must be whittled down to manageable proportions by trials,
such as those at Wisley, and by individual growers.
It is easy to get the wrong ideas about day lilies - for example, that their
flowers last for only a single day (which is what the popular name implies).
Erhardt distinguishes three distinct types of flowering which he calls day
blooming, night blooming and extended blooming.
Clearly, the night flowering kinds are not wanted for gardens although they
might have some use in breeding programmes if they have some desirable
quality. Most of the species, and also the older garden varieties, are day
blooming. Somewhat chillingly, Erhardt says that, as a rule, the flowers of
these last long enough to allow you to form an opinion about their worth
even if you are out at work during the day.
However, since many of these species are not really plants for evening
gardeners, the extended flowering types are being sought with increasing
eagerness. With these, Erhardt says, the flowers may last from one morning
until the next or from one evening to the next, which might not be quite so
attractive.
Best of all, and quite possible to obtain, are varieties that open in the
morning and persist until the evening of the second day. I can imagine a
time when all day lilies that are expected to win awards will have to
measure up to this category .
Garden varieties of day lilies now vary enormously in size and shape of
flower, height and habit of growth, and colour. In this last respect, it is
astonishing what has been coaxed out of a family which, in the wild,
produces only yellow and tawny orange glowers.
Now, we take for granted true reds and crimsons, many lovely shades of pink,
apricot, peach and orange, yellows of all kinds and even near-whites
(although, as yet, these are not very satisfactory). There are many
varieties with two or more colours, marked and patterned in various ways.
There are even purple varieties, which some gardeners find very exciting but
seem to me to be rather dull.
One valuable quality of day lilies is their ability to drop faded flowers so
that the plants look smart without the need for daily dead-heading. Unlike
true lilies, day lilies do not make any bulbs and so are planted, like any
other hardy herbaceous perennials, in spring or autumn if moved from the
open ground, or at any time if in containers. They are not fussy about soil
and do not object to lime.
