
PEUGEOT'S chairman, Mr Jacques Calvet, who said at the weekend he would like
to run for French president in 1994, is the latest businessman to bid for
high office.
Like Ross Perot, the Texan billionaire aiming for the White House, Mr Calvet
is right wing. But there the similarity ends. Mr Calvet, 61, is not a brash
outsider with poorly formed policies, but a calculating and well-informed
senior member of the French political and business elite.
Mr Calvet's political ambitions are no surprise. 'I am ready to put forward
my candidacy. . . . even if I have one chance in a thousand of carrying it
off,' he told guests at the French Open tennis tournament. He has often been
tipped for ministerial office and can hardly open his mouth without
attacking the Socialists, the Japanese or the European Commission, to the
despair of Peugeot executives who wish he would apply more of his powerful
brain to selling cars.
This time, Mr Calvet has raised the stakes, in what looks like a sensible
bet that voters will support someone who shares rising general anxiety about
loss of French sovereignty in the wake of the Maastricht treaty on monetary
and political union. He could also be betting that voters are tired of the
same old figures on the right: the equivocal Mr Jacques Chirac, leader of
the RPR Gaullist party, and former President Valery Giscard d'Estaing, the
remote Sphinx-like head of the centre-right UDF.
Mr Calvet's articulate attacks on European federalism and the shortcomings
of the Maastricht treaty place him in line with a large rebel group in the
RPR. Yet he is well out of line with the pro-European Mr Giscard d'Estaing,
who happens to be his former political boss.
If Mr Calvet really does follow his ambitions, he could find himself
standing against Mr Giscard d'Estaing in a joint UDF and RPR primary. The
Socialist candidate in the 1995 presidential election is likely to be either
Mr Jacques Delors, the Commission president - that would be a delicious
confrontation - or the equally pro-European former premier, Mr Michel
Rocard.
Even if Mr Calvet turns out to be bluffing, his declaration could well put
pressure on the right to fight harder against the Maastricht treaty, still
being ratified in France.
Mr Calvet has shown startling adaptability in his career. Educated at the
Ecole Nationale d'Administration, the gilt-edged civil service college, he
was head of Mr Giscard d'Estaing's private office when the latter was
finance minister from 1970 to 1974. Later, Mr Calvet joined Banque Nationale
de Paris, the largest state-owned bank, to become chairman only to be thrown
out when the Socialists came to power in 1981.
The Peugeot family asked him to help out at the car group a year later,
because it needed a strong manager who could turn round the near bankrupt
company and fight off union attempts to have Peugeot nationalised.
Mr Calvet did both with panache, confronting the new Socialist government
head-on with a heavy programme of Peugeot job cuts, at one point provoking
riots outside a plant near Paris. The Peugeot family made him chairman in
1984 and it is as a result of Mr Calvet's toughness that the group's
published net margins are now the best in the world car industry.
A handful of successors is now in place at Peugeot. He once said that 'one
should not stay for much longer than 10 years in a job,' which would bring
him neatly to 1994, a year before the elections.
