
MICROSOFT has announced top management changes and a broad reorganisation of
its operations. The US computer software group said its president, Mr
Michael Hallman, had resigned, to be replaced by a three-man 'office of the
president'.
Mr Hallman's resignation was a 'mutual decision' by Microsoft's board of
directors on Saturday, the company said. His departure comes as a surprise,
since Microsoft's financial performance has strengthened since Mr Hallman
joined the company.
'I have great respect for Mike Hallman, and for his contributions,' said Mr
William Gates, Microsoft chairman and chief executive. 'But the unique
nature of our business has outgrown the role of the traditional company
president.'
Mr Hallman, a former Boeing and International Business Machines executive,
joined Microsoft almost two years ago. At the time he was viewed as bringing
a new level of maturity to Microsoft's management.
However, 'it became obvious that our business has become so large and
complex that it is an extreme challenge for anybody from outside the
personal computer software industry to dig into all of the many issues
facing us', said Mr Steven Ballmer, one of the three executives to take over
the office of the president.
Mr Hallman is to be replaced by three of Mr Gates' closest associates. Mr
Michael J. Maples, 49, formerly senior vice-president in charge of
application program products, has been promoted to the new position of
executive vice-president, worldwide products group. He will oversee all
Microsoft's product development activities.
Mr Steven Ballmer, 35, formerly senior vice-president with responsibility
for systems software, including the successful Windows program, will be in
charge of worldwide sales support and marketing activities in his new role
as executive vice-president, worldwide sales and support group.
Mr Francis Gaudette, 56, Microsoft's chief financial officer, will be
responsible for manufacturing and distribution, finance, human resources,
corporate services groups and Microsoft Press.
