
BACARDI believes it has found the right one. The Bermuda-based international
rum company is to take a substantial stake in Martini & Rossi, the Italian
vermouth and wines group, according to industry sources.
The alliance between the two privately owned drinks companies, each with
sales of between Dollars 1.5bn (Pounds 750m) and Dollars 2bn a year, will
form the fourth largest group in the global wines and spirits industry.
General Beverage Corporation, Martini's Geneva-based holding company, said
yesterday that no directors were available for comment. Bacardi
International said Mr Eduardo Cutillas, chief executive, was abroad and no
one else could comment.
Martini is known to have been searching for some time for an international
partner. General Beverage, which has been advised by Mr Jacques Gelardin, of
Colker Gelardin, a private investment banking firm based in London, is
believed to have held talks with a number of companies, including
Allied-Lyons of the UK.
A deal with Bacardi, which is reported to have been advised by JP Morgan,
the US investment bank, would mark a further substantial step in the
consolidation of the international wines and spirits industry.
Leading drinks groups have been strengthening their competitive positions in
the past few years by extending their brand portfolios and distribution
networks through a series of acquisitions and joint ventures.
Guinness, for example, has followed its joint venture with LVMH, the French
champagne and cognac group, by buying Asbach Uralt, the German brandy
company, and Pampero, the Venezuelan rum company. Grand Metropolitan
acquired Cinzano, Martini's rival vermouth company, earlier this year.
Bacardi and Martini already have joint distribution companies in several
markets. In the UK, they are partners with Bass, the brewer, in Westbay
Distributors.
Bacardi rum is the world's biggest-selling brand of any type of spirit with
sales last year of about 22m cases. Its sales volume is nearly 10 times
greater than that of its closest rival, Pampero.
The group, has maintained an impressive growth record. But its reliance on
the single drink category has been regarded as a weakness.
Martini, founded in 1863, is the sixth biggest worldwide producer of wines
and spirits. It dominates the vermouth market with sales of more than 17m
cases a year and has built a brand portfolio that includes Otard, the
sixth-ranked cognac, Benedictine liqueur, William Lawson Scotch whisky,
Eristoff vodka and a range of sparkling wines.
Observer, Page 17
