
How much you are prepared to contribute?
Maximising your pension is important, but other commitments - such as
mortgages - require a share of your income.
This leads to a central problem in pension planning. The time when you could
gain the most growth from an investment, below the age of 50, is also when
you are least able to save.
Simon Philip, of Chantrey Financial Services, suggests it is best while you
still have heavy commitments to set a small proportion of your income for
AVCs, and stick to it as a form of self-discipline. If you are not able to
say goodbye to the money until you retire, do not put it in an AVC.
How great a pension are you aiming to achieve?
Inflation makes this a hard question to answer, and virtually any pension
illustration can mislead in some way.
But some calculations help. Family Assurance, a friendly society, has
launched a pensions guidance service which provides quotations on the level
of AVCs you will need to deliver the pension you want.
It does this by assessing the pension rights you have accrued in your
company scheme, and converting this into a regular pension, in today's
money. It then calculates the amount you would need to pay in AVCs to make
this figure up to the pension you are aiming for. The service is free,
although Family does take the opportunity to recommend its own FSAVC
contract, which is called Freestand.
This makes it easier to work out how much you should contribute. Remember,
illustrations must make assumptions about the rate of growth of your AVC,
and about inflation. Also, with luck, your salary will rise before you
retire.
How good is your in-house scheme?
Staying with your in-house AVC will give you a quieter life, and should cost
you less than an FSAVC. You therefore need to be unhappy with their
arrangements before you opt for an FSAVC.
According to Simon Philip, there are two main advantages you could achieve
with a free-standing AVC - diversification and improved investment
performance.
He suggests that if you have amassed more than Pounds 50,000 in the company
scheme, taking out a separate AVC might be good, just for the
diversification it would bring.
If the in-house scheme offers a poor choice - and some only offer one
building society account - then an FSAVC looks better. But some in-house
AVCs offer a wide range of funds and allow free transfers between them.
What is your tax position?
Brian Symonds of Sun Life points out that top-rate taxpayers have a stronger
incentive to stay with an in-house scheme. Claiming top-rate tax relief is
easier and quicker this way, and can be done immediately, while you have to
claim relief via your annual tax return for an FSAVC.
Will you stay with your current company until you retire?
If not, the portability of an FSAVC grows more appealing. You could treat an
FSAVC as a personal pension, and continue making contributions even if you
became self-employed, says Symonds.
If you are considering early retirement, but do not want your bosses to know
this, an FSAVC could make sense. Sudden heavy donations into an in-house AVC
might raise questions, which you could avoid by using an FSAVC.
Which Free-Standing AVC is the best for you?
Valid performance statistics are not available, as AVCs are long-term
investments, and the longest-lived policies have been going for less than
five years. The best you can do is choose a group whose unit-linked or
with-profits performance in other funds is strong.
But you can find out what the charges are. On unit-linked and unitised
with-profits AVCs. A 5 per cent bid-offer spread and 1 per cent annual
charges are typical. Keep your charges low. Also, avoid AVCs which restrict
your ability to shop around for an annuity when you retire.
