
IMPORTANT economic data from Germany this week will ensure that the country,
already troubled by industrial activity, continues to be the focus of
attention. The data are expected to confirm an economy slowing but not in
recession.
Most analysts forecast a fall in industrial production for last March.
Provisional figures for February's industrial production showed a monthly
rise of 1.2 per cent after January's sharp 5.2 per cent rise. According to
Ruth Lea, chief economist at Mitsubishi Bank, both figures were distorted by
mild weather factors. 'It is equally clear that there are still no signs of
serious recession in west Germany,' she says.
Employment data are also due this week. East Germany's labour market remains
grim. In March unemployment was 15.5 per cent from 9.2 per cent a year ago.
However, the number of unemployed is expected to have stayed steady in
April. West German unemployment appears to be rising, but modestly.
In the US, employment data for April is expected to confirm the anaemic pace
of economic growth. While unemployment claims have fallen since the
beginning of the year, the drop has not been of a scale normally associated
with a typical, healthy recovery.
Growth in M3, the target measure of money supply, in France is expected to
have risen further in March following February's increase. In February M3
was 3.5 per cent up on a year ago and the median forecast for March is a
rise of 0.5 per cent. The target range for M3 growth in 1992 is 4-6 per
cent.
Other economic data and events this week, with, in brackets, the median of
forecasts from MMS International, a financial information company, include:
Today: US, preliminary figures for first-quarter productivity, auto sales
April 21-30 (6.2m), presidential primaries in District of Columbia and North
Carolina; UK, April official reserves (Pounds 50m), state opening of
parliament; Canada, April foreign reserves; Japan, children's day holiday -
all markets closed.
Tomorrow: US, Federal Reserve releases Tan Book for May 19 federal open
markets committee, March wholesale trade; Japan, March trade balance - IMF
basis, March current account, March foreign bond investment; Canada, April
help wanted index (63).
Thursday: Germany, regular Bundesbank council meeting, G7 economic ministers
meet with CIS and eastern counterparts for East-West conference, April
unemployment - West (up 10,000), March employment  - West (up 5,000), April
vacancies - West (up 3,000), April unemployment  - East, April short-time
work - East; US, March consumer credit (unchanged), M1 (up Dollars 0.2bn),
M2 (up Dollars 1.8bn), M3 (up Dollars 9.5bn), for week ended April 27,
initial claims for week ended April 25 (410,000); Sweden, April unemployment
rate (4.4 per cent); Switzerland, April federal consumer prices index (up
4.5 per cent on year); Australia, March unemployment rate (10.6 per cent),
April employment (up 10,000); Canada, February wages and salaries (flat).
Friday: US, April non-farm payrolls (up 75,000), April manufacturing
payrolls (up 10,000), April unemployment rate (7.3 per cent), April hourly
earnings (up 0.3 per cent), April average work week; April employment growth
(up 0.1 per cent), April unemployment rate (10.9 per cent), April housing
starts.
During the week: Germany, March industrial production (down 1.0 per cent),
March manufacturing output (up 0.3 per cent), March manufacturing orders
(down 0.3 per cent), March trade balance (DM2.5bn), March current account
(-DM1.5bn); Switzerland, April Zurich consumer prices index; Italy, April
final consumer prices index (5.6 per cent); Denmark, March unemployment rate
(10.9 per cent), March trade balance excluding ships (DKr2.7bn); Holland,
April consumer prices index (up 0.3 per cent on month, up 4.3 per cent on
year); France, March M3 (up 0.5 per cent).
