
NEW ZEALAND in the 1980s and early 1990s has become increasingly aware of
its relatively small size. This realisation has been bolstered by its
banishment by the US from the Anzus defence pact, and awareness that its
once close links with Britain are fading as the UK becomes more deeply
involved in the European Community.
Much to its surprise, it continues to be regarded as a Pacific power by many
of its smaller island neighbours. In part, this is historic: following the
First World War it became a colonial power itself as Western Samoa, a German
Pacific territory, was ceded to its control. Many Pacific Island leaders
studied in New Zealand schools and universities, fostering links that remain
strong to this day.
Relations with France, the region's last remaining colonial power, remain
uneasy because of French nuclear tests. The Fijian coup caused a rift which
is healing under a new National government.
Turbulence often marks relations with states such as Samoa, although these
tend to centre on migration problems, particularly New Zealand's treatment
of overstayers. Recent New Zealand governments have run into friction over
aid matters, as they seek to earmark donations to causes that are seen as of
economic value to the island nations.
The five cyclones that devastated many of the nations in the past 18 months,
however, have shown the deep links with New Zealand in a generous outpouring
of aid by both the government and individuals. More Samoans now live in
Auckland than in Western Samoa. Remittances from migrants working and living
in New Zealand to relatives are an important part in sustaining some island
economies.
New Zealand has always been a trading nation. For over a century it has
supplied foodstuffs to French territories such as Tahiti and New Caledonia.
These commercial links led the Bank of New Zealand to become the main retail
bank in most of these territories. The bank's financial problems from 1987
forced it to sell these subsidiaries to Australian banks.
Today the Pacific, including Papua New Guinea, remains a significant market
for New Zealand products. This includes meat - the area takes 5 per cent of
all meat exports - and fresh vegetables. New Zealand places a considerable
effort in diplomatic relations with these often highly sensitive small
states. These efforts seem to be successful: despite occasional problems,
New Zealand is warmly regarded as its smaller size makes it less threatening
to tiny nations. As a result, New Zealand is set to win an increasing share
of trade with these countries.
