
BURMA'S ruling military junta has wrong-footed some of its fiercest critics
with a steady stream of announcements on political and economic reform over
the past six months. .
The State Law and Order Restoration Council (Slorc) has released hundreds of
political prisoners, lifted a night curfew, re-opened universities, eased
restrictions on foreign tourists and journalists, and reached a tentative
agreement with Dhaka on the return of thousands of persecuted Burmese
Moslems who sought refuge in Bangladesh.
The generals have also promised to hold a convention on a new constitution
in January, sought to accelerate a four-year-old economic liberalisation
programme and announced the partial privatisation of state factories.
The changes have sparked agonised debate among diplomats in Rangoon who were
once united in outrage at Burmese human rights abuses. There is division
between those who favour renewing foreign aid to Burma - suspended after
army suppression of the pro-democracy uprising in 1988 - and advocates of
continued isolation.
The isolationists contend that international pressure, and Burma's shortage
of cash, is partly responsible for the Slorc's reforms; They say pressure
should be maintained to secure the release of Ms Aung San Suu Kyi, the
detained opposition leader.
The advocates of renewed foreign aid argue that another uprising would lead
to another military crackdown. They argue it is better to foster economic
growth and encourage the creation of a middle class which could gradually
use the political institutions established by the Slorc  - and eventually
challenge the power of the military establishment.
The Burmese people themselves appear resigned, and they say the Slorc is
able to loosen its grip because it has stamped out opposition in central
Burma.
No-one believes that the Slorc, which ignored the results of a 1990 election
in which the opposition National League for Democracy won more than 80 per
cent of the seats, has any intention of yielding power.
Most Burmese wishing to share their political views live in terror of
informers. Opposition politicians who have not fled have been jailed or
frightened into silence. Participants at the convention will be vetted by
the Slorc, which is thought to have its own draft constitution ready for
rubber stamping. 'Without the participation of Aung San Suu Kyi, the
national convention will be regarded as a hoax by the majority of the
Burmese people,' says one Burmese doctor in Rangoon.
Senior officials acknowledge their distrust of democracy and all but admit
that the whole process is window-dressing.
'We are moving towards true democracy, democracy in which there will be
party pluralism,' declared Col Ye Htut, a de facto government spokesman, at
a recent meeting with foreign journalists. But a moment later he added: 'The
solution to problems in this country is not democracy. It is national unity.
However, since the general public desire a multi-party democratic system,
then this must be done by us.'
As if it to underline its determination not to relinquish political control,
the Slorc in October issued six 'objectives' for the national convention.
One of these stated that the army would have 'the leading role' in future
national politics.
The Slorc's economic reforms, however, have started to take root. For the
past four years, the government has nurtured the private sector and accepted
the failure of state-controlled enterprises under the previous military
government's 'Burmese Way to Socialism'.
Mandalay, straddling the main trade route from China, is booming. In the
capital Rangoon, newly-opened private restaurants are thriving, and the
first private bank has opened its doors.
Local businessmen are already drawing parallels between Burma and China,
where the unchanging nature of the political system has not stopped economic
reform or rapid growth. 'More or less they are following the Chinese model,'
says one Burmese banker. 'The ruling party is still in control but in the
economic sphere they are adopting gradual reforms.'
Foreign investors are vying to take over and refurbish the country's
state-owned hotels, the new Pepsi-Cola joint venture is planning to increase
production. Thai and Australian entrepreneurs are setting up businesses.
South Korean, Singaporean and Hong Kong companies have already established
factories to make textiles and electrical goods.
However, formidable obstacles still block the path to Burma's international
rehabilitation. The generals, for all their rhetoric, are wary of the free
market and point fearfully at the destabilising effects of economic reforms
in the former communist states of eastern Europe.
Potential investors in Burma are still deterred by corruption, bureaucracy,
the poor state of transport and communications and the Slorc's reluctance to
devalue the kyat, the local currency which trades on the black market at a
twentieth of its official value.
In addition, the Slorc does not know what to do about Ms Aung San Suu Kyi,
who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1991. She has refused to leave the country
and remains under house arrest. The soldiers standing guard in full public
view outside her home on Rangoon's University Avenue are a continuous
reminder that, although there has been some change, there is scope for much
more.
