
LONDON is once again to have its own panoramic viewing platform. But, unlike
the Eiffel Tower or Empire State Building, London's look-out point is miles
away from its most notable monuments.
One Canada Square, the steel-clad, 50-storey centrepiece of London
Docklands' Canary Wharf and the tallest building in the UK, is opening its
top floor to the public.
The decision to allow visitors has been taken to 'generate and maintain
interest in the Docklands', according to the administrators who were
appointed to the project in May.
At 800ft, the tower is 200ft higher than its nearest UK rival, the National
Westminster Tower in the City of London. On a clear day, the view from the
top can stretch for 30 miles.
Visitors will be charged Pounds 3 a person, but after additional security
and ticketing costs, this will do little to help the finances of the
project, which has debts estimated at Pounds 700m.
It will provide the first opportunity in nearly 20 years to visit the top of
the UK's tallest building. The 580ft Post Office tower (now the BT tower),
which held the record until the NatWest tower was built in 1980, has been
closed to the public since 1973, when a bomb exploded in the restaurant.
The Canary Wharf tower will be the tallest office building that can be
visited in Europe, since Frankfurt's 841ft 6in Messeturm is off limits to
visitors. However, an even loftier view is available from the the
iron-framed, 985ft 11in Eiffel Tower in Paris.
The tallest buildings in the US, the Sears Roebuck Building in Chicago and
the World Trade Center and Empire State Building in New York, also court
visitors. The world's tallest tower remains the 1,815ft CN Tower in Toronto,
while the UK's highest structure is the 1,265ft ITN mast in Lincolnshire.
The Canary Wharf tower will be open on Saturdays and Sundays, from 10am to
5pm, from September 12. On that weekend, the Docklands Light Railway will,
unusually, be open as it coincides with the European Oyster and Seafood
Fair, organised by the London Docklands Development Corporation.
