
SIKORSKY of the US, the world's biggest helicopter maker, is aiming to boost
its European market presence by setting up a new European headquarters in
Italy.
The company has also linked with Mitsubishi of Japan to study jointly the
possible launch at the end of this year of a new 19-passenger helicopter,
the S-92.
Mr Eugene Buckley, Sikorsky president, said his company intended to boost
its marketing and sales operations in Europe through its new European
organisation which later, could include direct manufacturing there.
The move is a challenge to Eurocopter, the joint venture between
Aerospatiale of France and Deutsche Aerospace of Germany, the world's second
largest helicopter group after Sikorsky.
Eurocopter is part of French-led efforts for a strong European helicopter
industry which was at the heart of a UK cabinet crisis in 1986 over the
future of Westland, the British helicopter maker. The crisis led to a
partnership between Westland and Sikorsky, with the US group's parent
company, United Technologies, taking a 7 per cent stake in Westland.
Westland has since resisted overtures from Eurocopter and intends to keep up
its links with Sikorsky and Agusta, the Italian helicopter maker which is
Westland's partner in developing the new EH101 naval and transport
helicopter.
Mr Jean Francois Bigay, Eurocopter chairman, warned yesterday that if
Sikorsky reinforced itself in Europe, his group would hit back with an
alliance with another manufacturer. Mr Bigay and Mr Buckley said the
helicopter business was going through an unstable time; they expected
further compression in the industry.
Mr Buckley said Sikorsky had 26 per cent of world helicopter sales, with a
Dollars 2.1bn (Pounds 1.05bn) turnover last year. Sikorsky also said Japan
had chosen its S-76C rescue helicopter for the Japanese Maritime Safety
Agency in a deal for up to 24, worth about Dollars 150m.
In Japan, Sikorsky and Mitsubishi are conducting marketing studies for the
possible launch of a new large transport helicopter, the S-92. Mr Buckley
said a decision was due at the end of this year. He declined to discuss the
possibility of Sikorsky acquiring McDonnell Douglas' helicopter activities.
Mr Buckley said he was keen to maintain a strong relationship with Westland.
Speculation is growing that Agusta may want stronger links with Sikorsky.
