
THE European Commission yesterday adopted a plan for a mutually agreed
system of road tax discs for EC lorries, regarded as essential for opening
up road haulage markets.
The plan, announced by Mr Karel van Miert, transport commissioner, is likely
to win approval from the Twelve because individual member states like
Germany are otherwise expected to go ahead with national road tax systems
likely to discriminate against outside hauliers.
The proposal follows a European Court of Justice ruling against German plans
to introduce unilaterally a road tax payable by foreign lorries.
A decision is expected before the end of the year on the measure, which will
come into effect in January 1994 and apply only to motorways and lorries
over 12 tonnes.
The object of the tax is to enable member states to recover infrastructure
costs from their road networks, and also to make railway transport more
attractive.
But no less important is the now improved prospect of the 12 agreeing to
road cabotage - allowing hauliers from one member state to pick up and
deliver goods inside another member state.
National restrictions on outside road hauliers mean that up to a fifth of
Community lorries are driving around empty at any given time.
The Commission is suggesting an Ecu929 (Pounds 725) a year minimum tax per
40 tonnes of lorry as a reference, but setting no upper limit.
The discs should be easily obtainable, for variable periods of days, weeks
and months, and imply neither discrimination against outside hauliers nor
border checks, Commission officials said. Where, as in France, a toll system
operates, no change is envisaged.
Officials say governments will be able to reimburse their hauliers for
excessive costs incurred abroad, apparently at French insistence.
The Commission still hopes to double EC spending on research and development
over the next five years in spite of the growing likelihood that member
states will rein back the research budget, writes Andrew Hill.
Mr Filippo Maria Pandolfi, research commissioner, yesterday unveiled plans
for a fourth 'framework' programme of research and technological development
involving spending Ecu14.7bn (Pounds 11.48bn) between 1994 and 1998. The
1990-94 programme is worth Ecu5.7bn.
The funds would be concentrated on certain key areas, including 'generic
technologies' which might benefit all sectors of industry, and 'big science' -large research programmes like the human genome project (the genome is the
sum of genetic material in an organism) which require multinational
collaboration.
