
BARCLAYS Bank, the biggest UK bank, is expected to lose its AAA rating for
long-term debt, following the decision yesterday by two of the world's
leading credit rating agencies, Moody's and IBCA, to review their ratings of
the UK bank.
The AAA rating is the highest possible and is given to the world's strongest
banks. Barclays had been the only UK bank to retain its premium rating: its
nearest rival, National Westminster, has an AA-plus rating.
It is rare that a bank retains its original rating when the rating agencies
put it under review. 'Barclays is going down to AA-plus,' predicted an
analyst.
Moody's of the US and IBCA, the European-based rating agency, are among the
world's leading rating agencies. The other leader, Standard & Poor's of the
US, downgraded Barclays to AA-plus a year ago.
IBCA said the decision to review Barclays' debt rating followed analysis of
full-year results unveiled on February 26. These showed a 30 per cent fall
in pre-tax profits to Pounds 533m and a sharp increase in loan-loss
provisions.
The rating agency conducted a similar review last year but decided to
maintain the top rating on the grounds that economic recovery would cut
domestic loan losses. However, the economic upturn did not arrive.
Mr David Andrews, an IBCA director, said Barclays' costs were running at a
higher level than some rivals.
Barclays' ratio of costs-to-income, a key measure of productivity, rose to
67.8 per cent, from 65.7 per cent in 1990. The cost-income ratios of the
other three UK clearing banks fell last year.
Moody's said its review would focus on the impact of a deterioration in the
quality of Barclays' loan book and also on the strength of its balance
sheet.
In 1991, Barclays made provisions of Pounds 1.758bn to cover the risk of
losses on loans. Only NatWest suffered a bigger bad debt charge. However,
Barclays' bad debt provisions were smaller than all the other banks as a
proportion of its UK portfolio of loans.
Some analysts fear that its rivals may simply be suffering from bad debts
earlier than Barclays and that Barclays may continue to suffer from high
loan losses longer than them.
Moody's also said it would assess Barclays' 'competitive environment and its
domestic and international strategies'.
