
Sir, Samuel Brittan's article ('What I would do as chancellor', October 8)
ends with the suggestion that the conflict between GDP exchange rate and
inflation targets may be irreconcilable. There is no need for this note of
despair provided one makes a distinction between those variables which are
intermediate targets, used as guides for short-term policy and medium- to
long-term goals.
The exchange rate is surely in the former category. I doubt people felt
happier when Pounds 1 was DM11.76 (or in 1923 when Pounds 1 was RM1010) than
they do now. On the other hand inflation and output are the latter category.
and most economists would agree with Mr Brittan that they are best combined
into a target for money GDP. The exchange rate has an important influence on
money GDP, and the most obvious thing to do is to use the exchange rate
target as a short-term guide to interest rate policy, while varying the
exchange rate target with reference to current performance of money GDP.
Obviously this is not compatible with a permanently fixed exchange rate, but
it is compatible with membership of an ERM in which realignments are seen as
a matter of course and not as the worst crisis since Dunkirk.
To relegate fiscal policy in the way that Mr Brittan does is surely a
mistake. If money GDP were on course to grow at target rate with the old
exchange rate, the devaluation must have raised the rate of growth of money
GDP and a fiscal contraction is needed to offset this. Of course, if money
GDP were growing too slowly at the old rate, then a change in the exchange
rate must have been a good, not bad idea.
The combination of a money GDP target with some measure of saving (like
public saving or the PSBR) requires joint use of monetary and fiscal policy.
If the two instruments are separated, there is a risk that the monetary
authority will find itself having to offset the effects of fiscal policy on
monetary GDP, while the fiscal authority has to offset the effects of the
monetary policy on the budget balance. For this reason I hope he is too busy
as chancellor to push through his Bank of England Act.
M R Weale,
faculty of economics
and politics,
University of Cambridge
