
What is killing us these days? As nations become more developed and people
more sedentary and dependent on technology, they become more prone to the
diseases of affluence.
Cardiovascular disease is the number one killer in the developed world.
Heart attacks and sudden death often occur without warning in people with no
previous history of heart trouble. According to the World Health
Organisation, of the 11m deaths a year in the west, a third are due to heart
disease and strokes.
Business people may be at high risk without realising it. Indeed, many might
appear to be deliberately courting heart disease.
When you set your long-term business plan, is your main aim simply to avoid
going bankrupt? Obviously not. As business leaders, you set many goals for
the company and keep a constant watch on the profit margin. Your health
demands a similar approach.
The four factors over which you can have some control and which affect your
chances of heart disease are smoking, high blood pressure, high blood
cholesterol and excess weight. Each will be discussed in future Health
Checks
The heart is a small muscular organ, about the size of your fist weighing
between 10 and 16 ounces. While you are reading this column, at rest, it is
pumping five litres of blood a minute (200m litres of blood in a 75-year
lifetime) to all organs of your body, carrying with it, among other critical
substances, oxygen, glucose and cholesterol.
While you are running for an aircraft at Heathrow or are stressed at a board
meeting, the heart responds by increasing the rate and pumping capacity up
to 22 litres a minute. Attempts to duplicate this natural miracle by
man-made means and artificial hearts have defied the best minds in medicine.
To perform its daunting tasks, your heart needs attention now, before it
starts telling you that things are going wrong.
The coronary arteries - small calibre vessels that carry the heart's own
blood supply - will not develop symptoms until they are 75 per cent blocked.
But once the arteries are blocked and producing symptoms - such as angina -
your options are already severely limited.
Most businessmen depend on three myths to avoid taking action.
The first is that to get the benefits of health and fitness, you need to
become fanatical - jogging at lunchtime and so on. In fact, becoming
obsessed with anything (including exercise) is unhealthy. Go for balance
that lasts.
The second great myth is that optimistic feeling that disease always happens
to the other guy. We are all susceptible.
Finally, there is a common complaint that taking care of yourself is pure
drudgery: eating rabbit food, cutting out all alcohol, sweets, coffee and
rice food. Contrary to popular myth, you can have your cake and eat it too.
But you will need to have enough information to make intelligent decisions
regarding your health.
However, there are no magic wands, pills, special weekends, or vacations
when you will be able to 'clean it all up'. Building up a health and fitness
reserve will take time and energy, but is your best investment.
The author is the medical director of the Insead Business Health course.
