
IF Japan has a national goal for the 1990s it is to bridge the gap between
its First-World economy and Third-World standard of living by focusing
massive investment on a woefully inadequate social infrastructure.
A widely-held view that average citizens have not benefited fully from the
nation's rising affluence, coupled with US pressure to drastically boost
domestic demand, prompted the government in June 1990 to pledge Y430,000bn
in infrastructure spending over the next decade.
That total is equal to slightly more than last year's gross national product
and should roughly double from the previous decade the annual growth rate of
public investment to 6-7 per cent, as it did in the first year of the
programme which ended this March.
The government also decided in early April to 'front-load' the fiscal 1992
public works budget by spending 70 per cent in the first six months to
jump-start the sputtering economy. This alone will not inject new revenues
over the full year, but a supplemental budget now appears likely.
'Thirty per cent of construction activity is public works and 70 per cent
private at most general construction and mid-sized companies, so public
spending alone cannot offset private declines,' says Ms Akemi Toyonaga,
construction industry analyst for Credit Lyonnais Securities (Japan).
Government spending - shaped both by need and political considerations  -
will be funneled into three broad areas: residential infrastructure
centering on housing, sewers, parks and traffic control; public facilities
such as airports, harbours, railways, roads and erosion and flood control
systems; and industry-related programmes focusing on waste and environmental
management.
Among the varied targets are: expanding average housing floor space over the
decade from 89 square metres in 1988 to 95 sq m; increasing the number of
homes connected to sewerage systems to 60 per cent from 40 per cent over the
same period; and enlarging by half the trading vessel harbour space by 1995.
'Twenty or 30 years ago, big infrastructure projects involved the so-called
bottleneck programme for industry. But from now on, the main concentration
will be on people's living standards,' says theJapan Development Bank.
The biggest uncertainty affecting the government's initiative is the price
of land. Reflation could mean using far more than the 15 per cent of the
Y430,000bn budgeted for real estate purchases and lessen the impact, says
the bank.
An Economic Planning Agency committee is set to release an infrastructure
policy review in May or June in which the most notable feature will be
proposed user fees to help cover the enormous expense of the government's
many initiatives, he predicts.
'In general, the difference this spending makes is going to be felt on the
micro level, neighbourhood by neighbourhood - and hopefully it will be
followed by private investment, especially in housing, to improve people's
immediate quality of life,' adds Mr Peter Sanborn, senior analyst at Jardine
Fleming Securities. 'The large projects may attract attention from the media
and contractors, but in the end they are likely to be far less important to
average Japanese.'
Among the largest of high-profile undertakings are new airports. Faced with
an acute capacity shortage, the government is increasing total airport
construction spending by nearly 70 per cent in fiscal 1991-95 from the
previous five years to Y3,220bn (Dollars 24bn).
The flagship facility is the New Kansai International Airport off the coast
of Osaka. The Y1,430bn island terminal will be the cornerstone of the Kansai
region's efforts to draw business to Osaka, Kobe and Kyoto and will be
Japan's first 24-hour air terminal. The venture has run into problems -
including more sinking than expected of the man-made island on which the
airport sits - and it is now set to open in mid-1994, about 15 months behind
schedule.
The cost has also risen 40 per cent, partly because of expanded terminal
capacity, says a spokeswoman for Kansai International Airport. When
completed, the airport will be connected to the mainland by a road and rail
bridge and accommodate nearly double the capacity of the area's current air
terminal.
Big airport projects also are planned at several regional capitals, while
the Narita and Haneda airports serving Tokyo are also being significantly
expanded.
Waterfront development is another big initiative area, although much of the
capital is private. Along Japan's most congested waterfront, the Trans-Tokyo
Bay Highway is scheduled in 1998 to connect Kawasaki, just south-west of the
capital, with Kisarazu on the relatively pristine Boso Peninsula, site of
the Kazusa Research Park and numerous tourist and resort developments. The
project, now well under way, involves building bridges, tunnels and
artificial islands at an estimated cost of Y1,150bn. Another structure at
the mouth of Tokyo Bay, and the Akashi Straits Bridge on Seto Island, will
be the world's two longest suspension bridges.
The Tokyo Bay area is being transformed by numerous other large projects,
including several on artificial islands. One of the biggest is the municipal
government's Tokyo Teleport, recently delayed two years and set to open in
1996, and the Tokyo International Convention Park. Private consortiums also
are developing large commercial and residential ventures in the area. A new
train line, loop highway system and road extensions will provide access.
The Nihon Convention Centre (Makuhari Messe) and a monorail are already
operating, and construction is in progress of scores of related facilities.
In Yokohama, the Y2,000bn Minato Mirai 21 project will house Japan's tallest
building, 75 stories high, on reclaimed land. It will join Yokohama Hall and
two already completed museums and numerous private projects.
Japan's quasi-public organisations are another source of heavy
infrastructure spending. For example, the Japan Railways (JR) group plans to
extend its bullet train lines. The Railway Technical Research Institute, a
JR affiliate with national and local government support, is conducting the
more ambitious of Japan's two magnetic levitation (maglev) linear railway
development projects.
If successful, it will help revolutionise train travel and cut by two thirds
the travelling time between Tokyo and Osaka, to one hour. The group is now
building a Y340bn, 27-mile track in Yamanashi Prefecture, 80 miles from
Tokyo, to test full-sized rail cars at speeds of up to 310mph. Many
technological hurdles are yet to be overcome, including big advances in
energy efficiency and the prevention of suspected health risks linked with
exposure to electromagnetic radiation. Commercialisation is not expected
until at well into the next decade, at least. By some estimates, the
phenomenal cost of building a new line along the congested Tokyo-Osaka
corridor could delay it indefinitely.
HSST Corporation of Nagoya is separately promoting three schemes, including
an inter-city maglev railway that would cruise at 186mph, a commuter version
and a downtown people-mover. The group includes Nagoya Railroad and Aichi
Prefecture, and it hopes full-scale testing recently begun will attract
national subsidies for a Nagoya commuter line.
Japan's now private telecoms giant Nippon Telegraph & Telephone is also
planning an aggressive infrastructure enhancement programme in the 1990s.
Combined with the JR it will add some Y25,000bn to infrastructure spending.
In addition, the nation's 10 electric power companies will invest trillions
of yen to increase generating capacity 16.2 per cent in the next five years
alone.
