
AT A BAR in downtown Bombay, hundreds of teenagers swing and sing along to
the music of MTV, seeing wild images on the Indian television set that had
otherwise censored even a kiss.
In New Delhi, the main topic of discussion at a ladies' card party is what
happens next in the two soaps that have most of urban India hooked  - The
Bold and the Beautiful and Santa Barbara.
And the drab images and stale news of the nine o'clock news on state-owned
television has been upstaged by the BBC's slick news coverage on the hour.
Satellite television has taken India by storm, and it is only a year since
Hong Kong's Star (Satellite Television Asian Region) TV first beamed its
test channel to a country where television viewers had never had the luxury
of switching channels.
A recent survey by the Hong Kong-based market research firm, Frank Small and
Associates, shows that India is Star's biggest viewer (other countries in
the the satellite footprint include Hong Kong, Israel, Korea, Pakistan,
Philippines and Taiwan), with 1,282,500 homes having access to the network
by June 1992. This is a phenomenal increase of 211 per cent over Star TV's
access to only 412,500 homes in January this year, making Star's marketing
team who visited India last month confident that the network grows in India
by 5,800 homes a day.
Even a year ago, government officials who controlled the state-owned
Doordarshan had dismissed the satellite and cable invasion, saying that only
the very rich would be able to afford it, and they had access to video
anyway.
Today, the short-sighted attitude of government officials, who felt they
knew best what Indians should watch, has meant that fewer people are
watching the dull entertainment and political propaganda that Indian
television has been dishing out since the late Sixties, when a national
television network was established in the country.
Star TV offers four 24-hour channels - the entertainment Star Plus, BBC's
Asia Service, Prime Sports, and music videos on MTV. Most cable operators
who sell Star by subscription (the average monthly rate is Rs120 (Pounds 2))
offer an extra cable channel showing popular Hindi cinema, which is still
the largest draw for Indian audiences.
Perceiving this, and realising the vast advertising potential that India has
to offer, Star will shortly provide a fifth channel - Zee TV, a Hindi
entertainment channel which will run the latest hits from India's film
industry.
Apart from Star, Indian cable operators offer the American CNN, which is far
less popular, and PTV, a Pakistan television network, which has worried the
government about the effect of political propaganda from across the border.
Also, though the government is still complacent that it will be a long time
before Star and other television networks give Indians, especially in the
villages, access to uncensored news and unabashed entertainment, television
experts reckon that at least a third of India will have access to satellite
television by the end of the century, making it part of the global village
virtually overnight. Though much of Star's fare is mediocre, at least people
have a choice without state censorship.
