
RESEARCH studies have shown that up to 75 per cent of all telephone calls
initially fail to find the right person. One solution to this problem is to
install an answering machine or other voice-messaging technology.
The answering machine is a simple and effective means for passing on
information to an individual or a small group of people if they are
unavailable at the time of a call.
The latest models boast sophisticated refinements which, for example, allow
owners to access the machine remotely then, by tapping out a code on the
telephone keypad, go straight to the stored messages.
Other features on new machines like the Panasonic KX-T1456, which costs less
than Pounds 85 and is designed for private or small business use, include a
message memo facility which enables messages to be left by family or a
secretary while the user is away.
Most mobile telephone-users now have access to messaging services. For
example, in the UK, Cellnet launched its 24-hour answering services for
cellphone customers last autumn. The system called Callback, will record all
calls automatically and then call the mobile phone user to transmit the
messages.
To use the service, the Cellnet customer simply taps in a short divert code
and from then on all unanswered calls are automatically handled by Callback.
The competing Vodafone mobile phone system launched a similar service called
Recall last month. Once connected to the service, all calls are answered,
even if the customer's mobile phone is switched off, and they are then
alerted by a call when they switch back on. The Recall service also offers a
number of other features including a simple help menu for example to repeat
or skip messages, security code message protection, a choice of greeting
message for callers.
More generally, voice and call processing technology enables a standard
telephone to function as a computer terminal by allowing the user to access
computer applications using voice commands, the telephone keypad or a
combination of the two.
The European market for voice and call processing systems is projected to
grow from Pounds 100m last year to Pounds 850m in 1995 and is being targeted
by companies like Hampshire-based Advanced System Architectures which has
launched a range of voice and call processing systems and products offered
as 'productivity boosters' to businesses and to software houses and systems
integrators.
Using the technology, voice mail and voice-messaging systems, which
represent a kind of corporate answering machine where messages are recorded
to be picked up by the recipient dialling a personal mailbox number, were
pioneered in the US by companies like Octel, AT and T, VMX, Northern Telecom
and Centigram.
Although used widely in the US, companies in Europe have only recently begun
using voice messaging technology and implementation of systems in the UK is
running about three years behind the US.
However, the UK is generally ahead of the rest of Europe, probably because
it was the first country in Europe to liberalise the provision of phone
services and equipment.
As a result the number of touch-tone telephones is quite large in the UK,
and that is a pre-requisite for voice messaging unless people carry
touch-pads around in their pockets the whole time.
Many large companies first begin to use voice-messaging services through a
telephone company bureau. This enables them to become familiar with the
technology by using a small number of voice mail boxes.
Once they appreciate the advantages, many install their own equipment which
can then handle more complicated processing tasks like combining voice
messaging with electronic mail and faxes.
By providing a link between the company computer system and the in-house
voice-processing system, electronic mail - usually sent from one computer
user to another - can be stored digitally in the recipient's mailbox.
A caller interrogating the messaging system will then be told that there
are, say, two voice and one electronic mail messages. The caller can then
listen to the voice mail messages and, if required, the electronic mail can
also be 'read' to the caller by a digitised computer voice.
Some systems can even go further, storing facsimile messages which can then
be forwarded to a fax machine near the caller.
While technologies such as voice mail enables callers to leave, retrieve or
exchange digitally recorded voice-messages, audiotex enables callers to
access a wide variety of pre-recorded information, for example aircraft
flight times.
Most recently, interactive voice response products have emerged which allow
callers to input information to, and retrieve information and services from
a company computer database using a touch-tone telephone.
These different voice processing technologies are gradually merging together
and becoming increasingly sophisticated with the use of voice recognition,
voice synthesis and image processing to handle more complex transactions.
One example of this was un veiled earlier this year by Syntellect, an
Arizona-based company which launched what it claims is the first
multilingual interactive voice response system.
Syntellect's new Global-Series of Interactive Voice response (IVR) systems
was designed to enable callers from anywhere in the world to call at any
time of day or night and to and leave or receive a message, place an order,
obtain a quote or get an answer a technical query.
Using sophisticated voice synthesis and processing techniques the system
'understands' six different languages at first contact level. Once onto the
system the caller can then communicate in any of 26 languages.
The IVR system can be connected to almost any sort of host computer system
allowing the caller to access his target's database, either to input
information or to retrieve information and services.
It also allows the caller to leave, retrieve or exchange digitally recorded
messages or access pre-recorded information using audiotex. The system is
aimed at organisations like banks and other financial services companies,
transport companies, governments and company sales and customer service
departments.
Using systems like this it is claimed that costs can be reduced because
there is less need for human telephone switchboard operators and customers
benefit from improved 24-hours service. Like their less-sophisticated
counterparts, they may also help increase the proportion of calls and
messages that do eventually find their way to the intended recipient.
