
THE US Department of Justice is investigating Mr William Sessions, director
of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), and his wife for the possible
violation of ethics rules.
The probe of Mr Sessions comes just three days after the Justice Department
called in the FBI to investigate whether Central Intelligence Agency or
Justice Department officials deliberately concealed intelligence reports
relating to the scandal over Dollars 5bn (Pounds 2.8bn) of illegal loans
made to Iraq by the Atlanta branch of Italy's Banca Nazionale del Lavoro
(BNL).
The investigation of Mr Sessions and his wife - concerning allegations made
in anonymous letters that they misused government cars and aircraft and that
Mrs Sessions misused her FBI building pass - triggered suggestions by
Democrats that the probe may be a politically inspired attempt to intimidate
the FBI.
Mr Paul McNulty, a Justice Department spokesman, yesterday denied these
suggestions, which came from congressional investigators. 'That is utter
nonsense. There is no tension between us. It just ain't so,' he said.
The FBI fracas comes in the wake of a public row between the Justice
Department and the CIA over the BNL affair.
The FBI acknowledged yesterday that there had been 'some confusion reflected
in the media concerning the investigation of certain issues relating to the
Department of Justice prosecution in the BNL case.'
Last weekend Mr William Barr, the attorney-general, called in the FBI, which
reports to him, and asked it to investigate possible misconduct by senior
administration officials in the handling of CIA reports. The reports, which
were withheld from Judge Marvin Shoob, the federal judge who presided over
the BNL case, contradicted the central premise of the government's argument
in court that the Dollars 5bn of Iraqi loans were single-handedly
orchestrated by BNL's former Atlanta branch manager.
An aide to Senator David Boren, chairman of the Senate intelligence
committee, confirmed yesterday that Mr Sessions had assured him the FBI
would conduct its BNL probe without sharing its information with the Justice
Department, whose officials might be targets of the investigation.
But Mr John Collingwood, the FBI spokesman, said yesterday the FBI and
Justice officials would work closely together on the BNL probe.
He said Mr Sessions told Mr Boren the FBI would pursue the investigation
wherever it led. 'What the director meant to tell Senator Boren is that he
does not expect to be inhibited by Justice or by anyone else,' Mr
Collingwood said.
