
FLETCHER CHALLENGE is to write down its Australian and New Zealand property
portfolio by NZDollars 400m (USDollars 215m) in a move that will force an
unexpected loss on the company for this year.
It says that the write down, intended to comply with international
accounting practices, will push the company into a loss of about NZDollars
155m for the year ending June 1992, instead of a predicted NZDollars 300m
profit.
The news stunned the New Zealand stock market. Analysts had been braced for
a write-down at the company's 48 per cent owned Australian property arm,
Jennings.
However, analysts had not expected write downs on the company's other
property involvements.
Mr Hugh Fletcher, chief executive, said the write-down did not represent
cash outflows, and would not affect the group's ability to pay a prudent
dividend. The board expects to pay a total dividend of 14 cents, compared
with 27 cents in 1990-91.
Included in the write-down is some NZDollars 50m as a result of the decision
by the Jennings group to write off ADollars 74m (USDollars 56.92m) of its
involvement in the ADollars 650m Southgate development in Melbourne.
Fletcher Challenge said this provoked it to write off NZDollars 350m from
its other property investments. That represents 29 cents a share, or eight
per cent of net asset backing.
The group forecast an end-June asset backing of NZDollars 4.13 per share.
Year-end assets per share will now be NZDollars 3.70, broadly in line with
the NZDollars 3.68 of end 1990-91.
A main reason for the heavy write-down was a wish to conform with US
accounting practices as far as New Zealand accounting standards and law
would allow.
Mr Fletcher said that the increasing overseas ownership in the company,
which now stands at 40 per cent and the overseas origin of debt, were
related factors.
He said the write-down would allow investors to focus on the group's
competitive strength and the potential for recovery in its four businesses
of pulp and paper, energy, building and rural servicing 'secure in the
knowledge that adequate provision had been made for the group's property
exposures.'
Mr Fletcher said that the company still expected to sell NZDollars 750m
worth of assets this year.
There were no plans for future cash issues. Next year's results were
expected to benefit from improvements in most markets, he said.
