
RENAULT and Peugeot, the French carmakers, yesterday announced a
co-operation accord to help the development of electric cars over the next
three years.
They have agreed to set up battery recharging points, servicing and
maintenance for electric cars in at least 10 French cities, with the help of
a FFr500m (Dollars 98.03m) government research grant, of which FFr300m is
set aside for this project.
Electric cars, produced in very small numbers in France, have a future as
second cars for short journeys, said Mrs Segolene Royal, environment
minister.
Around half of every car journey made in France is less than 3km and second
cars travel on average less than 40km per week, the ideal range for electric
vehicles, she said.
France's plentiful supplies of low-cost nuclear generated electricity
provided a good environment for electric cars, said Mr Dominique
Strauss-Kahn, industry minister.
The aim is to build a compatible infrastructure to support Peugeot's and
Renault's separate ranges of electric cars by the time they come into
commercial production. Peugeot estimates there will be a European market for
at least 200,000 electric cars a year by the end of the decade.
Peugeot and its sister company Citroen over the past three years have sold
300 small commercial vans, conventional models converted to electric power,
mostly to local authorities. It plans to launch an adapted electric Peugeot
106 hatchback and a Citroen AX in 1995, 50 of which will go on trial at La
Rochelle.
Renault also has a pilot range of electric vans, based on a six-year test by
local authority services in Chatelleraut, south-west France. These are due
for commercial sale next year and Renault is planning to sell an adapted
electric Clio hatchback from 1994.
Further ahead, it is working on two purpose designed electric cars, as
distinct from converted models. These are the Elegie, designed for
short-range city use, for possible sale from 1995, and the Vert, with both
petrol and electric engines for longer journeys, for possible sale at the
end of the decade.
