
NOW THAT virtually all the geraniums we use for planting outdoors in summer
are grown from seed, it is easy to forget that there is a different and very
important - though much smaller - trade in geraniums grown in the
traditional way, from cuttings.
This is carried out by nurseries, a few of which, such as The Vernon
Geranium Nursery, Cuddington Way, Cheam, Surrey; Fibrex Nurseries,
Honeybourne Road, Pebworth, Stratford on Avon, and Thorp's Nurseries, 257
Finchampstead Road, Wokingham, Berkshire, grow hundreds of varieties. I have
just received the 1992 Vernon catalogue, which is exceptionally well
illustrated and it made me think about the varied types of geranium that are
available in this way.
Taking this catalogue as a reminder, I see that Vernon leads off with
Speckled Geraniums, which means speckled flowers, although there are quite
different varieties with speckled or netted leaves.
I do not know any of the nine varieties which Vernon puts in this class and
cannot say how the speckling arises, but in most of the ivy-leaved or
trailing varieties colour blotching, which can be very bold, is due to virus
infection. This, though not harmful to the plants, can produce variable
results which are not to everyone's liking. Nevertheless an ivy-leaved
geranium such as Rouletta, which combines carmine and white in varying
proportions, is very popular and most striking for hanging baskets, window
boxes and other containers.
Still following Vernon, there are a few finger-flowered varieties, in which
the petals are quilled and the leaves deeply lobed. There are also many
varieties with double or semi-double flowers which I know to be highly
effective. In the way geranium specialists tend to have of making things
rather too complicated they recognise a separate race of double-flowered
varieties known as Rosebud Geraniums which have small, very full flowers
like little pompons. They are pretty but I have found them difficult to grow
as the flowers rot if the air is too moist.
Then there are Irene Geraniums, with big single flowers, although their
leaves can easily get too large and coarse if they are given over-rich soil.
The Deacon Geraniums are yet another double-flowered race and were all
raised by the late Rev S Stringer. Many, but not all, appear to make
exceptionally compact plants.
There is a great class of Single Geraniums, in character similar to most of
those we now grow so freely from seed. Cactus-flowered Geraniums have
quilled petals; the Vernon Geranium Nursery lists 18 varieties of a type
which it calls Stellar Geraniums. They seem to have no common
characteristics except that they all originated from crosses made between a
geranium known as Chinese Cactus and ordinary zonal-leaved geraniums, the
kind we commonly think of when geraniums are mentioned.
A few geraniums have cupped flowers and are known as tulip-flowered. There
are also old varieties with rather thin yet distinctly woody stems that are
called Unique Geraniums, and are close to the Regal Geraniums. Then there is
a big section, known as Scented Leaf Geraniums, which have nothing in common
except the quality of having aromatic foliage which releases its scent when
brushed. Most have insignificant flowers and many have deeply divided leaves
but one, named Pelargonium Tomentosum, has big, heart-shaped, densely downy
leaves that are strongly peppermint scented. Other scents are lemon, apple,
rose, nutmeg and pine.
There is a big class called Golden Foliage Geraniums and another called
Ornamental Foliage Geraniums, some of which have three separate bands of
colour on the leaves. One of the most famous of these is Mrs H Cox, which
combines bands of yellow, red and black with a green centre. It won a First
Class Certificate from the Royal Horticultural Society as long ago as 1879.
There are a great many Dwarf Geraniums and at least as many Miniatures which
are even smaller, just a few inches high. Cascade Ivy-leaved Geraniums are
much grown on the continent and Hybrid Ivy-leaved Geraniums are the result
of crossing ordinary ivy-leaved varieties with Zonals. They are intermediate
in habit and excellent for hanging baskets, window boxes and other
containers.
Regal Pelargoniums are mainly for cultivation in greenhouses and
conservatories though they can be used outdoors. They have large, often
richly-coloured flowers which are produced in late spring and early summer.
They can be stood outdoors when they cease to flower but need to be brought
inside before there is frost in the autumn.
Finally, there are the Angel Geraniums, which are really miniature Regals
and are said to be gaining in popularity.
It is an astonishing variety of plants to be obtained from one genus. Plants
can be purchased as rooted cuttings or as small pot plants for many months
of the year but especially in spring and early summer. They are easily grown
in peat or soil composts but most of the experts seem to prefer peat because
of its open, well-drained character.
They must not be allowed to freeze at any time, although high temperatures
are not necessary. For economy in winter I set my greenhouse thermostat at
7`C and keep the plants rather dry, but it would really be better to have it
three or four degrees higher. The biggest danger in winter is from botrytis
or grey mould fungus, which produces a rapid decay of stems and leaves and
flourishes in cold, damp air. Sulphur is the best remedy, either spray or
dust form.
