
THE EVIDENCE that electro-magnetic fields generated by electrical appliances
and overhead power lines can cause cancer is inconclusive, according to a
comprehensive review released yesterday by the National Radiological
Protection Board.
The NRPB is to sponsor more research into the health effects of non-ionising
radiation, to which everyone living in an industrialised country is exposed
through the use of electricity at home and at work.
The data available so far 'do not appear to provide the basis for
restricting human exposure to non-ionising electromagnetic radiation,' said
Mr Roger Clarke, NRPB director.
An NRPB committee chaired by Sir Richard Doll of the Imperial Cancer
Research Fund carried out the review. Mr Clarke called it 'the biggest study
published anywhere in the world on cancer and electromagnetic fields.'
The subject is controversial because some environmental groups, particularly
in the US, are convinced that electro-magnetic fields can damage health.
They have used the alleged cancer risk to campaign against overhead power
lines, and some cancer patients living close to power lines are now suing
electric utilities.
A report by the US Environmental Protection Agency in 1990 concluded that
there was a statistical link between exposure to electromagnetic radiation
and human cancer. But the agency's report was withdrawn before publication
because other federal bodies were not happy with it.
Sir Richard said in London yesterday that the agency's draft report 'was so
inadequate in so many ways that it could not be adopted'.
The NRPB report reviews more than 60 studies of occupational cancer in
electrical workers and eight studies of childhood cancer. Leukaemia and
brain cancer are the two diseases most likely to be associated with
electromagnetic fields.
'I am confident that there is no occupational hazard of leukaemia,' Sir
Richard said. There was more chance - though no clear evidence  - that a
small excess of brain cancer among electrical workers might be due to
electromagnetic radiation.
Professor Nicholas Grant of King's College, London, another member of the
NRPB committee, said the evidence for childhood cancer was 'weak'. He added
that exposure to electromagnetic fields at home might increase the cancer
risk by as much as 50 per cent to 100 per cent - equivalent to one extra
case per 1,500 children - or there might be no extra risk.
Additional research will be carried out in three areas: There will be a
large-scale study of childhood cancer, occupational studies, and laboratory
experiments with animals and cells to test the theory that electromagnetic
fields can promote tumours.
Electromagnetic Field and the Risk of Cancer, HMSO, Pounds 10.
