
ALTHOUGH the British involvement with Japanese gardens is very old, English
gardeners have never tried to follow in any great detail the philosophical
ideas which inspire much garden-making in Japan. Instead, Britons have
either use garden artefacts from Japan or made imitations of them.
Quite often, these have been associated Japanese plants, but in styles of
planting and design that are wholly British. The story often has been told
of the Japanese dignitary who was taken to see a 'Japanese' garden in
England and made the wry comment: 'We have nothing like it in Japan.'
The latest example of a Japanese garden in Britain was opened this spring at
Capel Manor Horticultural and Environmental Centre, Bullsmoor Lane, Enfield,
Middlesex. It sets out to represent what Japanese gardening is all about.
But, in visual terms, it falls short by attempting too much in too small a
space, so confusing one type of Japanese gardening with another. It also
uses reproductions rather than genuine Japanese ornaments and buildings.
The 12-page folder prepared to explain and illustrate the garden is,
however, excellent and contains a foreword by Dr David Hessayon which gives
an excellent idea of the various styles of Japanese garden-making. He says
the basic principles can be set out in 50 words. The Japanese garden, he
says, is a place where the designer, with a selection of stones, sand,
water, rocks, bamboos and/or plants, seeks to achieve a harmony between the
in (low, dark, delicate, feminine, damp) and the yo (high, bright, strong,
masculine, hard). Everywhere, the in must be balanced by the yo.
He explains all this in detail, and much of the rest of the folder is taken
up by illustrations of individual details. The purpose of this garden
largely is educational, and visitors seeking to learn from it evidently are
intended to pick and choose what is relative to their particular needs and
ideas and not to try to copy the whole.
I have no quarrel with this, but I think that most British gardeners would
be well advised to do just as they have been for at least 100 years when
employing the Japanese tradition - that is, to use it in whatever British
surroundings seem to be pleasing. For me, there is nothing incongruous about
the lovely, and genuine, Japanese rest house in the Batsford Park arboretum
in Gloucestershire, nor in the life-sized bronze animals there which Lord
Redesdale brought back from Japan to place at strategic points in the wide
grass rides through the trees.
There are many fine Japanese tea-houses in British gardens, none more
beautiful nor placed more pleasingly than that at Heale House, Middle
Woodford, near Salisbury. This was built by Louis Greville early this
century and erected by four Japanese workmen brought over for the project.
It stands over two streams which cross each another at right angles, one
passing under the other in a short conduit. There is also a red Nikko-style
bridge and all around are lanterns and other Japanese ornaments. The whole
is screened by trees and there are plenty of lush waterside plants, but
there is no attempt to follow any Japanese philosophical idea. Nevertheless,
it is beautiful and represents a style of garden- making which is very
British.
The most extraordinary Japanese garden I know is in Ireland - at Tully
House, Kildare. This was made by a Japanese specialist, Tassa Eida, between
1906 and 1910, and represents life from birth to death, a progression
through tunnels, up hills, beside streams and across water. There is a
tea-house in which the traveller rests before dying. It is beautiful and it
seems to me to be westernised almost completely.
The most remarkable situation I know for a Japanese garden in Britain is
outside the formal garden at Torosay Castle on the Isle of Mull, on the west
coast of Scotland. It is exposed completely to the rough waters of Loch
Linnhe and, on a clear day, you can see Ben Nevis. Here, you might regard
the garden itself as all in and the landscape in which it is placed as all
yo, but I do not suppose that whoever made it had that in mind.
