
THE BUNDESBANK has fuelled expectations of a further cut in interest rates
by softening the emphasis it places on one of its key indicators in the
growth of money supply.
German economists say the German central bank is drawing back from its
earlier insistence that the M3 measure of money supply - which includes cash
in circulation, current accounts and short-term deposits - should be
regarded as the most important indicator of domestic monetary stability.
'It is undoubtedly a change in the Bundesbank tone,' said Mr Wolfgang
Scheremet of the DIW economic research institute in Berlin.
'They are preparing a change in direction. We expect the bank to cut its
rates, but we are not sure when. Once they have changed direction, they
usually move fairly swiftly in the same direction with a series of decisions
in a relatively short space of time.'
The central bank's tough interest-rate policy has been based largely on its
concern that M3 growth at 9 per cent was well outside its target range of
3.5-5.5 per cent.
German economists, however, say Bundesbank statements this week on special
factors affecting M3 growth and a clear policy by the bank in recent days to
keep very short-term interest rates below 9 per cent are possible precursors
to further cuts in the Lombard and discount rates.
The latest indications have come in policy statements from Mr Hans
Tietmeyer, vice-president of the Bundesbank, and from Mr Otmar Issing, a
fellow director and leading monetary hawk on the ruling council.
They follow a rising tide of criticism from German economists at the bank's
excessively rigid adherence to the M3 measure of money supply on the ground
that it has been distorted by the processes of unification.
Mr Tietmeyer said that the Bundesbank was 'very conscious that the
discussion about the measurement of the growth in money supply is influenced
by some special considerations.
'They include not only the expansion of credit in east Germany, and the
definition of a money supply target after reunification, but also the
quality of the M3 measure of money supply as an indicator, given an inverse
interest-rate structure, and the effects of currency inflows.'
The inverse interest rate structure refers to the fact that the bank's high
interest rate policy has kept short-term rates above long-term rates,
encouraging investors to switch to short-term deposits, which are themselves
part of the M3 measure.
'M3 is and remains for us naturally one important measure (for monetary
policy),' he confirmed. But he added: 'we know that there are currently a
series of other factors which must be taken into account and watched
closely.'
