
AUTOMOBILES Peugeot, the French car maker, has joined forces with Inchcape,
the British trading company, in an effort to boost car sales in Japan.
The two companies said yesterday they would invest more than Y2bn (Pounds
9.8m) in Peugeot Japon, which imports Peugeot cars into Japan. The two will
hold equal shares in the company.
Inchcape is the world's largest independent car distributor, although this
will be the company's first direct involvement in car importing and
distribution in Japan.
The deal follows a plunge in sales of Peugeot cars in Japan. They are
expected this year to be under 2,800 units, against a peak of 5,414 in 1990.
Unless sales pick up sharply, Peugeot will have difficulty supporting the
180 Peugeot showrooms in the country.
Signs of friction have emerged recently between Peugeot and Suzuki Motors,
which sells Peugeot cars in its dealerships. Peugeot and Rover last month
ended an agreement under which Rover distributed Peugeot cars through its
dealers in Japan.
Peugeot is hoping to capitalise on Inchcape's experience in car
distribution, as well as its extensive marketing experience in Japan in
other product areas.
The two companies will hold equal shares in Peugeot Japon, but it remained
unclear whether stakes in the company would be retained by minority Japanese
shareholders, including Suzuki, Seibu Motors and Nissho Iwai. Discussions
with the companies are continuing.
Mr Derek Whittaker, Inchcape group motors director, said the aim was to
improve performance of the existing network of dealerships, and no expansion
was envisaged.
He had begun discussions with Suzuki on how to rationalise the network to
increase sales and profitability.
The move to bolster Peugeot sales comes when sales of Volkswagen-Audi cars,
which together have 22.5 per cent of the import market, have been severely
disrupted.
Yanase Motors, Japan's biggest dealer in imported cars, has decided to stop
selling Volkswagen-Audi cars from next year.
Mr Philip Mead, Peugeot Asia Pacific director, said: 'We are there to attack
the market and take market share from German manufacturers'.
