
THE Bundesbank was warned yesterday that it will damage both the German
economy and its own reputation and policies if it does not relax its
hardline campaign against inflation.
As the bank's central council met to fix its money supply targets for 1993 -
an important signpost for its future interest rates policy - the
authoritative DIW economics institute in Berlin claimed inflation was under
control.
'One can predict with great certainty that west German inflation will sink
in 1993 and in following years,' it said. The institute said central bank
policy-makers should focus on establishing a monetary policy based on the
economy's ability to expand rather than a policy based on its own inflation
ideals although prices are rising at almost twice the 2 per cent rate sought
by the bank.
Implying that interest rate cuts were needed, the institute said
'impatience' over achieving its inflation goal at a time when the economy
was losing momentum would be damaging. It argued that reluctance among
western companies to invest would endanger recovery in the east. This in
turn would make it more difficult for the federal government - at present
the main source of capital and income in the former East Germany - to rein
in spending.
In this case, if the Bundesbank interpreted its inflation aims too narrowly,
its appeals to government, employers and unions for action to ensure
stability would lose their credibility, the institute said.
DIW, which has close contacts with the Bundesbank, was one of the leading
institutes which recently advised the bank to increase its mid-range money
supply target for next year to 7 per cent. The current comparable figure is
4.5 per cent, while the October annual growth rate in the M3 measure was
over 10 per cent.
M3, which comprises sight deposits, deposits of less than four years'
maturity, most savings accounts and circulating cash, is usually viewed by
the bank as an indicator of inflation trends.
The results of yesterday's M3 meeting - due to be announced today - are
widely expected to involve a wider target range with the upper limit raised
significantly above the current 5.5 per cent. The lower limit, now 3.5 per
cent, is forecast to change less. This would send a signal that the bank
still has to be convinced that inflation is under control.
This year's 4.5 per cent M3 mid-range figure stems mainly from the bank's
estimate of 2.5 per cent growth potential in the economy and its ideal 2 per
cent inflation rate. Main elements in the economic institutes'
recommendation of 7 per cent are potential growth of 3 per cent (actual
growth is expected to be nil) and 3 per cent inflation (expected to be at
least 3.5 per cent).
