
SIMON Crane spends his days looking out for abandoned babies, shooting
stars, flags, pennants, crows and candlesticks.
Mr Crane is a chart analyst, one of the much-maligned, but now indispensable
technical observers of foreign exchange movements. The flags, babies and
stars are different ways of describing the lines he puts on paper.
Yet Mr Crane is anxious to avoid colourful language. It creates confusion
over what chartists are about, he says. In Mr Crane's words, forex chartists
aim to show where the risk or profit on a particular currency lies within a
given period, and where the market is at that particular time.
'The market is a big playing field,' he says. 'Everyone knows where the ball
is, and where the goalposts are. What they do not know is where the pitch is
or just where the boundaries are.'
The key to drawing charts is past performance. 'With a monotonous
regularity, the same picture occurs,' says Mr Crane. Using a measurement of
performance, the chartist aims to make a projection about what might happen
in the future, he says.
Critics of charts - who disparagingly refer to the discipline as the
'autopilot approach' - would hold that Mr Crane's job takes little account
of the unquantifiable factors such as politics and sentiment affecting
exchange rates.
Mr Crane argues no chartist would ignore such factors. 'At the end of the
day, you are analysing the psychology and dynamics of the market,' he says.
'There is no scientific method of interpreting charts.'
However, there is one golden rule and that is: 'The market is always right'.
Such a rule applies as much to fundamentalists as to chartists, he says, and
each faction would be wrong to ignore the other.
Differences of opinion merely fuel Mr Crane's enthusiasm. He maintains that
among the 25 banks and corporations which his company - Crane Investment
Analysis (CIA) - lists as clients, there are a healthy number who disagree
with what he says. Yet they still come back, because most traders will not
ignore the risk parameters as defined by detailed charts. 'We define where
the resistance is, where the support is . . . and make a judgment as to how
much pace is behind the current move.'
On a given day, Mr Crane could work with hundreds of charts. The aptly-named
CIA - Mr Crane keeps his methods secret even from close friends - deals also
with the precious metals, capital markets and equity markets. However, the
bulk of his analysis deals with currencies and capital markets.
To the sceptics, Mr Crane says charting is likely to become an increasingly
important tool for foreign exchange trading.
Technical analysis is essential, he says, 'in a market place where a large
percentage of any given currency move occurs over increasingly shorter time
frames'; and in a market worth some Dollars 700bn a day and growing,
according to his own calculations, traders will find it more and more
difficult to ignore any help they can get.
