
The ambitions of Microsoft know no bounds. Not content to dominate the
market for software run on stand-alone PCs, the world's largest software
company now aims to extend its reach into 'workgroup' computing.
'We are seeing the world evolve from islands of information on individual
workstations to groups of people collaborating on shared information,' says
Bill Gates, Microsoft chairman and chief executive. He aims to put Microsoft
in the forefront of this 'PC evolution' with a rush of new products over the
next six to nine months.
The PC remains at the centre of Gates's world but his strategy reflects the
view that networked PCs will eventually take over the traditional role of
minicomputers and even mainframe computers in corporate computing.
Workgroup computing is emerging as a way to use PCs to enhance office
productivity. Instead of only speeding up the ability of individuals to
write memos or calculate budgets, workgroup software enables teams of people
to collaborate on projects more efficiently.
The first step in Microsoft's grand plan will emerge later this month with
the introduction of 'Windows for Workgroups', a new version of Microsoft's
popular 'Windows' that incorporates networking programs enabling each member
of a group to share information, send electronic mail and schedule group
meetings.
By incorporating basic workgroup functions into its Windows operating
system, Microsoft aims to expand the market for workgroup computing and
encourage more PC users to link their machines to networks. Currently only
about 30 per cent of Microsoft Windows users are linked to networks.
But this is 'just the beginning', Microsoft says. Its next move will be to
launch a database program that simplifies the development of applications
such as order entry and inventory tracking. These programs will set the
stage for 'Windows NT', Microsoft's next-generation operating system, now
expected some time in the first half of 1993. This, the most ambitious of
Microsoft's efforts, is designed to provide PC-like 'ease of use' on
company-wide computer network systems.
Yet all of this comes from a company which, despite its successes, has so
far lagged behind competitors in providing software that links PCs on
networks and in applications geared to more than one user. Neither does
Microsoft have any experience beyond PC software which, however important it
may be, lacks the maturity of programs developed for larger systems.
Microsoft faces 'a boatload of competitors', acknowledges Steve Ballmer,
executive vice president of sales and support. He lists Apple Computer,
which already provides networking and workgroup software; Borland, with its
database programs; and Lotus Development with its 'Notes' program for
workgroup communications. IBM and Sun Microsystems are also competitors.
The immediate obstacle to Microsoft's ambitions, however, is Novell, which
commands a 60 per cent share of the market for network operating systems. To
date, Microsoft is running a poor second to Novell in the networking
software stakes.
None the less, Microsoft's vision is compelling. By extending the familiar
easy-to-use features of Windows and not forcing PC users to adapt to new
applications programs, Microsoft can provide a relatively painless path from
personal computing to workgroup or company-wide computing.
It is a scheme that will have great appeal for growing companies and for a
generation of computer users whose experience is based upon the personal
computer. 'We view workgroup computing as an evolutionary process,' says
Ballmer. 'Users should be able to use the applications and operating systems
they are familiar with, and be able to pick and choose the elements they
need for their particular workgroup.'
Microsoft also stresses the 'openness' of its approach including
connectivity to systems running other operating systems and 'gateways' to
existing mainframe- or minicomputer- based systems. Hewlett-Packard and
Digital Equipment have been close partners with Microsoft throughout its
development process, the company says.
However, with its fuselage of promises it appears that Microsoft's ultimate
goal may be to become, as IBM was in the 1970s and early 1980s, the software
standards setter of the 1990s. The question will be whether computer users
and manufacturers are ready to accept Microsoft in that role.
