
TRIBUTES poured in from all quarters for Mr Willy Brandt, the one-time
left-wing firebrand, rebel, refugee and illegitimate son of a northern
shopgirl, described yesterday as 'one of the great Germans of this century'.
Mr Brandt's death prompted warm tributes for his role in the rebuilding of
Germany after the second world war, his Nobel Peace Prize-winning efforts
through the policies of Ostpolitik to reconcile a divided Europe and his
humanitarian commitment to peace.
President George Bush, expressing deep sadness at Mr Brandt's death, said
the former West German chancellor was 'a towering figure of the post-war
era, a man of vision and courage'.
French President Francois Mitterrand, in a message of condolence to Mr
Richard von Weizsacker, his German counterpart, said: 'You have lost, we
have lost, one of our most eminent contemporary figures, as well as a man of
justice and peace.'
Mr Pierre Beregovoy, the French prime minister, described Mr Brandt as 'a
passionate democrat and a lucid chancellor.'
Mr Brandt's political career as an exiled opponent of Adolf Hitler, mayor of
West Berlin and eventually chancellor of then West Germany won praise from
across the political spectrum of the country he lived to see reunified.
The warm words from rivals in Germany on the political right as well as from
the left showed that by the time he died on Thursday night, after months
suffering from intestinal cancer, he was regarded more as a father figure
than a political partisan.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl, who clearly welcomed his advice and the breadth of
his international experience, described him as a 'German patriot, European
and world citizen simultaneously. His word carried weight beyond party
boundaries.'
He paid tribute to him for his 'wise counsel,' particularly through the time
of German unification, when, Mr Kohl said: 'I could count on his support.
Even before the fall of the Berlin Wall he recognised that the chance was
there to overcome the division of Germany and Europe.'
The chancellor spent more than an hour at Mr Brandt's bedside only days
before he died, and yesterday had a long conversation of condolence with his
widow.
Ms Rita Sussmuth, president of the German parliament, read a eulogy to
Brandt at a saddened and hushed session. Flowers were laid on the seat he
had occupied in parliament.
German flags in front of parliament, across many cities and at the Social
Democratic party headquarters hung at half-mast.
Mr Hans-Dietrich Genscher, West German foreign minister from 1974 to 1992,
said: 'Through him Germany won the confidence in the world that enabled it
to open up to the east without alienating its western partners.'
Lord (Denis) Healey, the former British Labour party minister and a close
friend of Mr Brandt, praised in particular 'his massive humanity'. He said:
'Many people will remember a photograph of him kneeling in contrition as the
German chancellor in the Warsaw ghetto, which was one of the great images of
post-war Europe.'
Mr John Major, the British prime minister, hailed Mr Brandt as a 'champion
of liberty'.
In Moscow, Mr Mikhail Gorbachev, the former Soviet president, said the world
had lost 'an outstanding politician of our epoch' and a 'great democrat'.
Mr Brandt, who died at his home in Unkel outside Bonn, will be buried in
Berlin next week. President von Weizsacker has ordered a national
commemoration ceremony, the date for which remains to be fixed. A state
funeral will wait on the wishes of Mr Brandt's widow.
