
PRESIDENT George Bush yesterday floated the idea of using a basket of major
commodities as an indicator of currency values and an aid to restoring
stability in the foreign exchange markets.
'We believe it can be useful in strengthening the co-ordination process to
more intensely utilise an economic indicator that compares the relationship
among our currencies and a basket of commodities including gold,' Mr Bush
said.
The idea was aired at a reception held yesterday evening at the White House
for ministers attending the annual meetings of the International Monetary
Fund.
Mr Bush emphasised that the commodity basket was just a suggestion for
improving international economic co-ordination, and could serve as 'an
independent reference point for our multilateral surveillance process'. But
the idea - especially with the inclusion of gold among the commodities -
carries an echo of the old gold standard, which pegged exchange rates up
until the 1930s.
Economists at the Federal Reserve Board, the US central bank, have pointed
out some of the difficulties involved in using commodity prices as a
reference for economic policy.
'While commodity prices contain valuable information for the policy-maker,
whether they belong at the centre of policy implementation remains to be
proven,' commented Mr Donald Kohn, director of the Fed's monetary affairs
division, at a conference three years ago.
Mr Kohn pointed out that one has to establish a target level for commodity
prices and this can be a tricky exercise; for rising or falling commodity
prices can indicate different policy responses depending on the level of
those prices.
'Ultimately, one suspects, commodity prices will take their place in that
eclectic mix of indicators that have keyed policy recently,' Mr Kohn said.
President Bush's proposal bears all the hand prints of Mr James Baker, his
chief of staff. Indeed, Mr Bush's speech was written by Mr Robert Zoellick,
one of Mr Baker's closest aides.
When Mr Baker was treasury secretary in the late 1980s, he put forward an
identical proposal to link currencies to a commodity basket, including gold.
At that time the proposal came to nothing. However, any move to link
currencies, albeit indirectly, with gold is likely to prove popular with the
right wing of the Republican party, many of whom hanker after the stability
of the gold standard of pre-first world war years. Such ideas also have a
following in the US Federal Reserve, where Mr Wayne Angell, one of the
governors, has long been an advocate of a commodity link for currencies.
It is unlikely that the idea will gain support with the main trading
partners of the US. A senior official of the Bundesbank, the German central
bank, said last night that he was sceptical about such a suggestion. One
European monetary official dismissed the notion as an election ploy.
