
What's in a name? The answer is a touch more than Dollars 31.2bn (Pounds
16.30bn) if it happens to be Marlboro.
The Philip Morris-owned cigarette brand is the most valuable in the world
according to a new assessment of brand values to be published next month by
Financial World, the US business magazine.
Coca-Cola occupies the number two slot. At Dollars 24.4bn, it is worth more
than twice as much as its rival Pepsi-Cola, which is ranked fourth at
Dollars 9.6bn.
The list is published just as controversy has flared again in the UK over
the question of brand values. Terry Smith, head of research at UBS Phillips
& Drew, the securities house, was suspended from his job last week after his
criticism of a number of legal accounting practices which he claims could
give a misleading impression of a company's financial position. The
practices include that of capitalising brands as intangible assets in the
balance sheet.
Accountants, finance directors, and marketing directors have been at odds
over the issue since the Nestle bid for Rowntree in 1988 raised questions
about the market valuation of such Rowntree brands as KitKat and Quality
Street.
Since then a number of leading UK companies - including Grand Metropolitan,
Guinness, Ranks Hovis McDougall, and United Biscuits - have put at least
some of their brands in the balance sheet.
Guinness, for instance, does not capitalise its beer brand, valued at
Dollars 2.28bn and ranked 17th in the world by the US survey. The drinks
group recognises only acquired brands such as Johnnie Walker and Bell's
Scotch whiskies, Gordon's gin and Asbach brandy, which have a clear
benchmark for valuation, identifiable earnings, and could be sold
separately.
Ian Duncan, Guinness's managing director, finance and administration, says:
'I have no doubt that our practice of recognising acquired brands in our
balance sheet is correct; and I believe it is becoming widely accepted that
brands like ours with a wide, international consumer franchise are real,
substantial and highly valuable assets just as much as, and indeed sometimes
more so than, property and plant, which can be subject to more risk of
obsolescence.'
Much of the criticism of brand valuation has focused on the judgements used
in calculating values; and one or two oddities emerge from the Financial
World estimates.
The magazine bases its approach on methods devised by Interbrand, the UK
consultancy. To find Marlboro's brand value, for example, it first estimated
the brand's annual operating profit - Dollars 3.4bn based on sales of Pounds
15.4bn and a profit margin of 22 per cent.
It then calculated that a non-branded cigarette, employing the same capital
as Marlboro, would have made profits of only Dollars 462m.
This amount was deducted from Marlboro's Dollars 3.4bn operating profits,
leaving Dollars 2.9bn. After a 43 per cent provision for taxes, the final
figure of Dollars 1.7bn was deemed to be the net brand-related profits.
The Dollars 1.7bn was then multiplied by a factor of brand strength,
dependent on market position, overall market prospects, degree of
internationalism, and marketing support. The Marlboro multiple, picked from
a range of 12-20, was 19, giving a brand value of Dollars 31.6bn.
Using these methods, the survey ranks Guinness's Johnnie Walker Red Label,
the world's best-selling Scotch, 14th in its list of brands with a value of
Dollars 2.54bn (Pounds 1.32bn), and Gordon's gin in 28th place at Dollars
1.1bn (Pounds 578m). The total value of the two brands is far above the
Pounds 1.39bn balance sheet value that Guinness puts on all its spirits.
Such disparities illustrate the problems attached to brand accounting with
which the accountancy profession is still wrestling.
But the problems need not detract from the use of brand valuation as an aid
to management. The debate on brand values in the US has centred not on their
place in corporate financial reporting but on their use as a counter to
undue emphasis on short-term financial performance.
The feeling persists among marketing managers that profit-based performance
measures encourage actions, such as over-pricing or extensive sales
promotions, that produce quick profits but erode long-term brand values.
