
THE Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC) blocked the proposed acquisition
of British International Helicopters (BIH) by Aberdeen-based Bond
Helicopters yesterday on the ground that it was against the public interest.
BIH was put into administration last December after the death of Robert
Maxwell, who had acquired the helicopter company from British Airways in
1986.
The MMC concluded yesterday that a merger of BIH with Bond Helicopters would
leave only two operators, each with about half the market providing
helicopter services on the North Sea to the UK offshore oil and gas
industry.
The MMC said that risked reducing competition and forcing up prices for
North Sea offshore helicopter services.
The biggest North Sea operator is Bristow Helicopters, with about 51 per
cent of the market, followed by Bond with 29 per cent and BIH with the
remaining 20 per cent. BIH also operates a scheduled passenger helicopter
service between Penzance and the Scilly Isles.
An earlier bid by Bristow for the former Maxwell-owned business was
withdrawn after it was referred to the MMC.
The MMC decision was criticised by Mr Stephen Bond, the Aberdeen company's
managing director, as demonstrating 'a complete lack of understanding of the
industry'.
He said it failed to recognise that foreign competitors were preparing to
attack the UK offshore market.
'The decision has been made from a UK point of view when it should have been
looked at from an overall European perspective,' he said.
'There are already 11 other European operators working in non-UK waters and
this decision severely weakens the UK helicopter industry's ability to
compete effectively and maintain market share.'
Mr Bond said KLM Helicopters and its US partner ERA had recently applied for
an operating licence for UK waters.
The MMC, however, said demand for helicopter services on the North Sea was
likely to remain stable or decline over the next few years.
It argued that if the merger went ahead, neither of the two remaining
operators would compete strongly for market share and prices would tend to
rise.
The MMC also said there was unlikely to be any successful competition from a
new firm entering the market.
