
AEROSPATIALE of France and Deutsche Aerospace yesterday merged their
helicopter interests into a new company called Eurocopter to form the
world's second biggest helicopter manufacturer after Sikorsky of the US.
Mr Jean-Francois Bigay, Eurocopter's chairman, said the new company
controlled by Aerospatiale wanted to attract other partners including Agusta
of Italy and Westland of the UK, its two European competitors, as well as
negotiate alliances with Asian partners and possibly with a Russian group.
He confirmed Taiwan Aerospace was interested in co-operating with Eurocopter
which already has ties with China, Japan and Singapore. The company is also
conducting preliminary studies of possible co-operation with one of the
Russian helicopter design groups.
In the face of shrinking government defence budgets and a depressed civil
helicopter market, Mr Bigay said he expected to see the number of leading
western helicopter manufacturers decline from eight to three or four by the
end of the decade.
Eurocopter is the first tangible move in this global rationalisation of the
depressed helicopter industry. But further rationalisation of the industry
in Europe is likely to prove difficult in the near term because Westland and
Agusta have so far shown little interest in associating themselves with
Eurocopter. Westland, which is also associated with Sikorsky, and Agusta are
co-operating on the EH101 naval and troop transport helicopter.
Mr Bigay said the combined Aerospatiale and Deutsche Aerospace helicopter
operations were expected to show a net profit in 1991 of about 4 per cent to
4.5 per cent of their combined turnover of FFr12.65bn (Pounds 1.30bn) last
year. 'Anything below that would be disappointing,' he said. The combined
operations won 256 new helicopter orders last year worth FFr3.4bn with
Aerospatiale accounting for 216 of the new orders. This was lower than the
290 orders Aerospatiale's helicopter division won in 1990 and reflected the
depressed market.
Mr Bigay said military orders had reached their lowest level since 1960 and
prospects for 1992 remained bleak. A further uncertainty was the German
government's recent proposal to reduce its requirement for the new Tiger
anti-tank helicopter currently being developed by Eurocopter by DM2bn
(Pounds 700m) between 1993 and 2005.
He warned that the decline in defence spending could lead to more structural
problems for the helicopter industry. But Eurocopter planned to strengthen
its leadership position in the civil helicopter market to help offset the
decline in defence business.
