
DOCKLANDS is both a very old community and a very new one. Some of the
people who live there have roots in the area which extend back for
generations; others have been there only months or years.
But, together, they have a common interest in ensuring that one of Europe's
largest development projects is a success.
For some people, the priority has been the completion and operation of vital
elements of the area's commercial infrastructure; others have been concerned
to ensure that the all-important, social aspects of a developing riverside
community attract equal attention.
Most at least agree that Docklands is beyond the point where division and
disagreement are useful. Despite inevitable, continuing friction, the
emphasis is on working together as much as possible for the benefit of the
entire community.
'We all fought with the development corporation but, if you can't beat them,
join them', says RITA BENSLEY, a lifelong docklands resident and prime mover
in the Docklands Business Initiative. It was formed last year principally to
lobby government for a go-ahead to the Jubilee line underground extension.
Mrs Bensley, despite other community commitments, jumped in to help. Though
she held many doubts about the way the area was being developed, she
believes the underground extension is vital for dockland's future.
She helped organise a petition for the extension among the local community -
which raised 2,500 signatures on the first day - and then accompanied it to
Downing Street. The government, she says, has to show its support for the
east end of London and docklands in particular, which 'many people think has
closed down'.
Mrs Bensley is also chairwoman of the Association of Island Communities, a
docklands umbrella group which has been fighting for local people for more
than 50 years. She is administrator at a local community centre and also
helps out at an old people's club room.
'The Jubilee line will bring in more employment, some of it for local
people. If it goes ahead, it will be wonderful news. The people of docklands
have been forced to live on a building site for ten years. We've had the
coffee, now its time for the cream'.
Another high-profile activist is PAT WARD, a former Barclays Bank man who
came to docklands in the mid-1980s to establish his bank's presence in the
area. Made redundant, he joined the Isle of Dogs Community Trust, becoming
its director in 1991.
The trust, which was set up in 1989, raises funds from the business
community and distributes them within the local community. It has to date
given about Pounds 200,000 to a variety of organisations. Bids for grants of
up to Pounds 1,000 are considered and the trust also has other funds to help
larger self-help projects. Mr Ward says:'We are helping to create permanent
links between local business and community which are of benefit to
everyone'.
LES WEBBER is chairman of the Docklands Business Club, which was started in
1984 by dockland's 'early settlers' when wellington boots were still the
order of the day.
Mr Webber, the club's third chairman, says it has suffered in the last 18
months, given the recession and lack of confidence in docklands. But
membership has again started to rise, with around 450 names now on the
corporate register. They include Ogilvy & Mather, BT, Tate & Lyle and recent
newcomers Texaco.
A prime role for the club, apart from lobbying everyone and everything from
ministers to Commons select committees on behalf of the business community,
is to encourage networking between local companies. He believes the club's
future is now secure.
Mr Webber is also well-known locally as an executive of Builder Group, the
trade press publishers, which has itself invested Pounds 8m in docklands
premises.
'I believe in banging the drum for Docklands. Unless people already here get
off their backsides and shout about the attractions, then our own investment
in the area is being eroded,' he says.
One of the single biggest investments in Docklands is London City Airport,
perched on the Royal Docks and run by WILLIAM CHARNOCK, managing director.
Mr Charnock arrived in early 1988, the year after the airport opened for
business. The controversy surrounding the airport was still in full swing
and, as the complex has expanded, its impact on the local community has been
the raw material of local newspaper headlines.
Mr Charnock charts the enormous changes at the airport which have taken
place since his arrival, and is confident that, despite the turbulence
surrounding its expansion, its future is now looking brighter. Speed of
access to the airport, despite its proximity to the city, has been
unreliable because of the weak transport links and the slim choice of
destinations has inevitably restricted its popularity. No big airline
operators have come in, and, as yet, there are no domestic, onward links.
But several new services are to be introduced in the coming months and there
will be faster access from the City following the opening of the new
docklands highway - 'from the City and on to your aircraft in 30 minutes. We
are compact, quick and friendly,' he claims.
Last year the airport handled 187,000 passengers and he hopes 1993 will see
up to 300,000 people passing through. The airport, however, is still
loss-making, a position which is unlikely to change until between 450,000
and 500,000 opt for London City. Capacity is two million a year.
Mr Charnock, who has a staff of 90 (around 450 people, in all, work around
the airport complex) is optimistic - 'the year has started very well, the
airlines appear increasingly confident and things are looking up.'
Construction group Mowlem has not, however, yet managed to find a partner to
share its load.
Someone who has been involved in the development of docklands a great deal
longer is PETER TURLIK, head of strategic affairs at the London Docklands
Development Corporation. A town-planner by profession, he was involved in
docklands before the LDDC was born, firstly via secondment to the Greater
London Council's docklands joint committee and then to the Department of the
Environment.
He joined the LDDC on its formation in 1981 as director of industrial
development, with responsibility for vesting in the corporation local land,
and for setting up the docklands enterprise zone - 'that first Christmas
there were 12 of us in the old Fred Olsen shipping building and we kept
getting lost every time we tried to get off the Isle of Dogs through the old
timber yards.'
Mr Turlik later became director of business development and by 1988 was
overseeing efforts to attract overseas investment. As head of strategic
affairs, he oversees the LDDC corporate plan, which is submitted annually to
the DoE.
He thinks the corporation has used the last two, difficult years well to
retrench and prepare for the next phase of expansion - 'I sometimes have to
pinch myself. Things have gone tremendously quickly. We had a lot of luck in
the 1980s and we've also had our bad breaks. But we don't give ourselves
enough credit for what has been achieved.'
Docklands is a new experience, however, for ROGER COLOMB, a managing
director of Texaco, the energy group, which moved into Canary Wharf only
weeks ago. As the man in charge of administration, he has been responsible
for relocating 1,000 staff, the last arrivals moving in to Westferry Circus
at the beginning of March.
Mr Colomb may be a new face and Texaco may be a new name locally but he is
keen to make his company an integral part of the local community as soon as
possible. He says Texaco has an opportunity to play an important role in the
life of Docklands, financially as well as socially, and intends to do so.
The company, with a 1,000-year lease on 230,000 sq ft of office space, has
already forged links with local organisations. Mr Colomb says there is 'a
real opportunity for us to put down some real roots.' But his own, daily
journey from Buckinghamshire takes him only ten minutes longer than to
Knightsbridge so he does not intend to move in to live.
ERIC SORENSEN might be forgiven for thinking he has been chief executive of
the LDDC for ten years, rather than just over two years. He arrived from the
Department of the Environment as docklands faced its biggest crisis and
readily admits that the going has been extremely tough - 'the recession, the
collapse of Canary Wharf, uncertainty over the Jubilee line and the DoE's
own decision not to relocate here gave the impression that the government
had become bored with the whole process. It was not the case, but that's how
it appeared.'
Mr Sorensen, 48, was at the DoE from 1967 until he arrived at the DoE and
has wide experience of urban regeneration. He was private secretary to Mr
Peter Shore when he was environment secretary and spent three years as head
of the Merseyside task force, developing local regeneration projects.
By 1987 he was head of the urban policy unit in the cabinet office and
became deputy secretary of the DoE's housing and construction command before
joining the LDDC. Last year was, he says, the low point but he is optimistic
that docklands will soon be back on course.
There is also a new spring in the step of MALCOLM HUTCHINSON, managing
director of the Docklands Light Railway. After a rough start which made it
something of a local laughing stock, the DLR is regaining its reputation as
a modern, fast passenger service linking docklands and the City.
With Brown Root, the US engineering contractors, appointed to manage the
system's expansion over the next three years, Mr Hutchinson says:'I am a
great fan of Docklands. I am confident it has a bright future and I am
determined, with the help of my staff, to play a full part in the area's
regeneration'.
