
LATIN AMERICAN banana producers have offered an olive branch to their
Caribbean neighbours, saying they want to prevent the increasingly strident
debate over access to the European Community market from becoming a banana
war.
The Caribbeans have grabbed at the opportunity for dialogue and have invited
the Latin Americans to a meeting of trade ministers, likely to be held in St
Lucia later this month, to discuss the banana market, amid Caribbean hopes
that the arguments can be resolved without damage to the islands' exports
and their fragile economies.
The appeal for conciliation was made by Mr Rafael Calderon, the president of
Costa Rica, to the Caribbean Community (Caricom), when he addressed the
community's annual summit meeting. Costa Rica is not a member of the
community but is seeking observer status.
'We should resolve this dialogue without a banana war,' Mr Calderon said
after speaking to the Caribbean leaders. 'The fight for just relations with
Europe must continue, but there should not be a south-south fight. We back
preferences for Caribbean bananas, but we do not want the EC to lower the
quantities now exported by Latin America to the EC.'
The community's leaders immediately issued the invitation to the Latin
Americans to attend this month's ministerial meeting. 'There is a glimmer of
hope in the Costa Rican statement that a banana war should be avoided,' said
Mr John Compton, the prime minister of St Lucia, one of the four islands of
the Windward group whose economies are heavily dependent on bananas.
At the heart of the dispute is the new EC banana import regime that took
effect at the start of this month, which imposes a 2m-tonnes-a-year quota
for Latin American fruit. Shipments within the quota attract a duty of
Ecu100 (Pounds 77.60) a tonne while for imports above this level the duty is
Ecu850 a tonne. Caribbean and other traditional suppliers, such as those in
Africa, will have tariff-free access for the remainder of the EC's needs,
about 1.5m tonnes a year.
The Latin Americans, who are the more cost-efficient producers, wanted an
open market but traditional suppliers to the EC, mainly African and
Caribbean countries, said that without protection their industries, and some
economies, would be destroyed. Following the recent failure of Germany and
the Benelux countries to have the new import regime overturned by the
European court, the continuing dispute now hinges on attempts by the Latin
Americans to have a panel of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
declare the regime untenable.
The immediate concern of the Latin Americans, who shipped 2.4m tonnes of
bananas to the EC last year, appears to be what to do with the 400,000
tonnes they will not now be able to ship. Latin American official have said
they will lose about USDollars 1bn in export earnings over the next two
years.
'The new European regime means lower prices for bananas sold to the United
States,' said Mr Calderon. 'If Latin America has 400,000 tonnes left over
after it is allowed to sell its quota to the European market, and this goes
to the US market, then that will affect the price of the fruit which Latin
America sells to the United States.'
Mr Compton maintained that the Caribbean producers, and others in the
African, Caribbean and Pacific group of countries, which has a trade treaty
with the EC, were under attack from the Gatt, the Latin American producers
and the US companies involved in the Latin American banana industry. He said
there were already signs of increasing quantities of 'dollar' bananas as the
Latin American supplies are called, in the European market, and that that
was depressing prices.
Caribbean producers have tried, with no apparent success, to recruit the
support of the US in the debate over the allocation of market shares. The
mood in the region is somewhat bitter. Mr Edwin Carrington, the secretary
general of Caricom, said there was 'concern' in the region over the position
of 'friendly countries' such as the US that favoured the Latin American
arguments.
The region is clearly not convinced by statements made in Washington a
fortnight before the summit by Ms Donna Hrinak, the US deputy assistant
secretary for Inter American Affairs, that the US had not taken sides and
was not supporting Latin Americans producers to the detriment of those in
the Caribbean.
'The EC banana regime is inconsistent with the obligation which Gatt members
have, and inconsistent with what we hope will be the outcome of the Uruguay
Round which, when completed, will benefit all trading partners,' she said.
US officials at the Caricom summit said Washington's position had not
changed.
Mr Calderon forecast 'victory' for the Latin Americans in their effort to
win enough support at the Gatt and 'morally oblige the Europeans to
negotiate with us, although it is not our intention to harm, in any way
whatsoever, the exports of Caribbean countries.'
'There is no doubt that we in the Caribbean support open trade and fully
support the objectives of the Uruguay Round in GATT,' countered Mr PJ
Patterson, Jamaica's prime minister. 'Yet, we must find the right balance
that allows small exporters to find security in traditional markets.'
