
THE SYDNEY Morning Herald's main story yesterday, headlined 'PM sends Kiwis
Dollars 500m welfare bill' was accompanied by a cartoon showing a New
Zealander lying on an Australian beach and saying he had emigrated because
job opportunities were better there.
Almost all Australia's daily newspapers carried front-page reports of a
briefing by one of Mr Paul Keating's senior aides on the agenda for the
prime minister's four-day visit to New Zealand, which starts in Wellington
today.
The media coverage reflects Australian prejudices about New Zealanders, who
are widely believed to have taken an unfair advantage of reciprocal
immigration and social security arrangements between the two countries.
However, the story was regarded with puzzlement in Wellington, where Mr
Keating's visit is regarded as an opportunity to ease recent strains in the
bilateral relationship.
In particular, Mr Keating was thought to want to soothe resentment caused by
Labor's occasionally vitriolic criticism of New Zealand's free market
economic policies in the run-up to the Australian federal election in March.
Ironically, the growing Australian resentment about New Zealand immigrants
has been accompanied by rapid progress towards economic integration
following the 1983 Closer Economic Relations (CER) agreement. Studies show
that both CER and the parallel Trans Tasman Travel agreement, which
guarantees free movement of Australian and New Zealand citizens, have
delivered net benefits to both countries.
Free trade in manufactured goods was established in 1990, and bilateral
trade is growing at 12 per cent a year. However, the greatest benefits have
accrued to New Zealand, which now sends 19 per cent of its exports to
Australia.
As a result, the relationship with Australia has become a high priority for
New Zealand, which virtually ignored its larger neighbour until the 1980s,
in spite of their shared history as former British colonies. Mr Jim Bolger,
the conservative New Zealand prime minister, would also like a successful
round of talks to improve his image in the approach to a difficult election
later this year. However, there are a number of areas in which agreement may
be difficult:
New Zealand wants to see rapid progress on 'second generation' CER issues
such as harmonisation of standards, corporate taxation law, business law and
investment rules. It also wants greater access to markets such as
telecommunications, coastal shipping and insurance.
Some progress has been made, partly as a result of the inclusion of New
Zealand ministers in most of Australia's ministerial councils, which
co-ordinate federal and state government approaches to such issues. But Mr
Bolger will be seeking an indication that harmonisation remains a priority
for Australia, and that the speed of reform will be increased by the
re-elected Labor government.
In particular, New Zealand would like to tie up an agreement on
pre-clearance for airline passengers, which has been held up by Australian
concerns about New Zealand's visa requirements for third countries.
Mr Bolger will try to defuse the welfare row by agreeing to a review of
reciprocal social security arrangements, especially for pensioners, but he
will resist any attempt to weaken the free travel agreement. The Australian
government has been under pressure from its trade union allies to restrict
access for some workers, especially sheep shearers, who are accused of
undercutting established wage rates.
Canberra has been perturbed by New Zealand's support of the North American
Free Trade Agreement, which Australia sees as a potential threat to Japan,
its biggest trading partner.
New Zealand has worked hard behind the scenes to allay Australian fears, but
Mr Keating will be seeking assurances that Wellington remains committed to
the integration of both Australasian economies into the Asia Pacific region.
Mr Bolger, who returned on Tuesday from a trip to Japan, China and South
Korea, said last week that he was 'comfortable' with Wellington's
increasingly close relationship with Asia.
New Zealand's trade is more geographically diversified than Australia's, and
Wellington is less enthusiastic than Canberra about the prospects for
regional trading organisations such as the Australian-inspired Asia Pacific
Economic Co-operation process.
New Zealand's nine-year-old anti-nuclear legislation, which bars visits by
nuclear armed or powered ships, has reduced the effectiveness of the Anzus
defence pact, which links Australia, New Zealand and the US. Mr Bolger would
like to repeal the legislation, but is unable to do so because it is
strongly supported by voters of all parties. As a result, the US has
suspended exercises with the New Zealand armed forces, restricting its
access to intelligence and military equipment.
Canberra has continued bilateral defence links with New Zealand, which
include a joint frigate programme, but Australian ministers have recently
made clear that they will not support a return to three-way exercises until
the nuclear ban is abandoned. Mr Keating may also express concern about the
falling level of New Zealand defence spending, which has been capped for
three years because of budget constraints.
There is one area in which the two leaders will be in complete agreement:
both want to see a rapid conclusion to the Uruguay Round talks on the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Both countries would gain substantially from liberalisation of agricultural
trade, and the talks are likely to conclude with a joint appeal to the US
and the European Community to stop bickering over the details.
