
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton yesterday reaffirmed his confidence in Ms Janet Reno,
US attorney-general, and said he had no intention of asking her to resign
because of the tragic ending to the siege of a religious cult at Waco,
Texas.
Mr Clinton said he took full responsibility for the government's actions on
Monday, when more than 80 cult members died in flames after Federal Bureau
of Investigation officials had started to pour teargas into the buildings
which the cult's adherents were occupying.
The ultimate responsibility for the deaths, however, was placed by the
president with Mr David Koresh, the cult leader, who was believed to be
among the dead and whom Mr Clinton described as 'dangerous, irrational and
probably insane'.
'I was surprised, (which) would be a mild word, that anyone would suggest
that the attorney-general should resign because some religious fanatics
murdered themselves,' Mr Clinton said.
The possibility that the disastrous end to the Waco siege might damage
politically Mr Clinton or Ms Reno seems to have occurred more to television
interviewers seeking an intelligent question to ask than to politicians or
the general public.
Members of Congress say they are likely to hold hearings on the incident but
congressional aides say they have received little reaction from voters so
far.
Senator Joseph Biden, chairman of the Senate judiciary committee, dismissed
the suggestion that Ms Reno should resign. 'God, I hope somebody like her
sticks around a long time in government. This is a woman who makes hard
decisions and takes responsibility for the decisions,' he said on television
yesterday morning.
Even so, the siege may provide new impetus for efforts to pass tougher gun
control laws. Mr Clinton has already said that, if Congress were to pass a
bill to impose a waiting period for background checks before anyone may buy
a gun, he would sign it.
AP adds from Waco: The FBI yesterday denied responsibility for the Waco
deaths and said Mr Koresh deliberately had his followers start the fire that
killed them.
