
GENERAL MOTORS, the US carmaker, is looking to acquire one or more Japanese
parts makers to increase sales of components in the Japanese market.
Mr Philip Austin, vice-president of GM's Automotive Components Group in
Japan, said: 'To be a strong player in any market you need a manufacturing
presence and we don't have one in Japan.'
Although acquisitions of Japanese companies by foreign groups have been
rare, Mr Austin said the timing was good since many Japanese car parts
suppliers had suffered from the economic downturn. 'Their investments in the
US have become a burden and they are overcommitted in Japan with borrowings,
so opportunities obviously exist,' he said.
GM's move reflects its growing interest in developing its Asian operations.
The components division, which currently sells over 70 per cent of its
product to the parent company, is working to reduce its dependence on the
North American market to 50 per cent of revenues by 2000.
US and Japanese trade negotiators will meet in Hawaii next week to discuss
the possibility of encouraging Japanese purchases of US cars and car parts
in an effort to moderate Japan's huge trade surplus.
US-made car parts have been more successful in penetrating the Japanese
market than US-made cars. GM, for example, sells more than twice as much in
components in Japan as it does in cars, and Mr Austin said GM expected sales
to Japanese carmakers to reach Dollars 2bn globally by 1998, compared with
Dollars 900m last year.
Japanese carmakers have stated their willingness to try to buy Dollars 19bn
of foreign car parts in fiscal 1994 and there is a move on the US side to
push Japan to set a similar target for 1995 and 1996 as well. Although the
political pressure has helped raise awareness on the part of Japanese
carmakers of the need for change, GM has sought to expand its business by
working to better meet the needs of customers.
As a result the US company has even joined the supplier associations of
Japanese car parts makers which supply a particular car company. These meet
regularly to discuss their customers' policy and improve communications with
them.
