
ECONOMIC reforms may have brought spectacular material rewards to millions
of Chinese, but growing affluence is also taking its toll - on the country's
roads.
China reported 60,000 fatalities last year, an increase of 10 per cent on
the year before, but the actual toll could be much higher, perhaps as many
as 100,000 road deaths.
An official of the Traffic Control Department of the Ministry of Public
Security said the official figure of 60,000 fatalities had 'a lot of water
in it' - a Chinese expression indicating that the official statistic
under-estimated the gravity of the situation.
'The real figure can't be published because it's just too shocking,' he
said. 'The internal estimate was 100,000 last year.'
China's economic boom - the economy grew by a staggering 12 per cent in 1992 -has brought with it a flood of new vehicles on to the country's already
congested roads.
Traffic jams are now the rule rather than the exception in many of China's
cities. Beijing's traffic has become particularly heavy in the past year due
in part to a surge of new joint ventures involving foreign participation.
According to a recent New China News Agency despatch, China, with a
population of 1.1bn, had 6m cars, buses and trucks using its roads. But this
official figure almost certainly understates vehicle numbers.
China's approach to road safety seems haphazard and limited resources appear
to have been devoted to publicity campaigns. That may be about to change, as
the cost to the community of road trauma dawns on the authorities. One
indication of growing official concern is that two decades after most
western countries introduced seat belt regulations, China is to follow suit.
By July, new vehicles will be required to fit belts as standard equipment.
Vehicles already on the road will be required to conform or be deemed
unroadworthy. Fines for non-use of seat belts will be five yuan (about 60
pence), a fairly derisory amount if the Chinese are indeed serious about
improving road safety.
According to the spokesman for the Public Security Ministry's traffic
department, some 70 per cent of road accidents occurred in country areas
where ignorance of road safety and traffic rules tended to be greater.
The official blamed bad driving for most of the accidents. 'The driving
standards of Chinese motorists are very poor,' he said. 'They don't care
about traffic rules. Once they get on the road they drive like crazy.'
Mr Yang Jinyao, deputy principal of the Beijing Driver's Training School,
said that in the capital drivers were subjected to a rigorous training
schedule, but with the rapid increase of numbers of cars on the road it was
inevitable the toll would rise.
He said Chinese drivers were certainly not as safety conscious as
westerners. Drink-driving was also a main problem. He estimated that about
one third of serious accidents involved a drunk driver.
As more and more Chinese take to the roads in motor vehicles, forsaking the
push-bike that had transported them with relative safety for so many years,
they are beginning to take out accident insurance.
But numbers availing themselves of this protection are still small,
according to a representative of the People's Insurance Company of China.
Third party insurance is compulsory.
