
HEART DISEASE is being attacked with a new and powerful scientific weapon -
genetically-engineered 'designer' mice. Animals always have played a leading
role in western medical research, although this has led to ethical debate,
moral outrage and the occasional terrorist bombing. But the deliberate
creation of congenitally-diseased animals by genetic engineering is
something else.
The main cause of heart disease and strokes causing death in the western
world is atherosclerosis, the hardening and narrowing of arteries by fatty
plaques deposited in their walls. These form when the concentration of
cholesterol in the blood exceeds its cholesterol-carrying capacity.
Ideally, a complex biochemical mechanism in cells surrounding blood should
ensure that cholesterol concentration never rises to dangerous levels but,
in humans, the concentration is notoriously variable and often far too high.
Could atherosclerosis be caused by a fault in this mechanism, in the same
way that diabetes arises from a fault in the sugar-regulating mechanism?
Cholesterol is transported in the blood along with protein 'chaperones' that
keep it in solution and also present it to the regulatory mechanism of the
surrounding cells. Many different proteins are involved but one, called
apoE, is known to be abnormal in many humans with atherosclerosis.
To discover if defective apoE causes disease or is merely associated with
it, researchers needed to test the effect of eliminating normal apoE
function in an otherwise perfectly normal animal. Genetic engineering allows
the coding of genes for any protein to be modified.
So, the researchers used genetic engineering to produce a mouse strain
devoid of functional apoE genes - and, therefore, of the apoE protein coded
by them. Even on low-fat diets, the mice showed abnormally high levels of
blood cholesterol.
On high fat, western-type diets, they exhibited greatly elevated blood
cholesterol and quickly developed serious atherosclerosis. Since normal mice
are relatively resistant to fatty diets, the blame for the atherosclerosis
of the engineered animals can be laid right on defective apoE.
This experiment eventually could allow people to be screened for defective
apoE genes at any age, even before birth. The results of such screening may
affect anything from health education strategies to insurance premiums.
The natural resistance of non-human animals to fatty diets has long
intrigued investigators who speculate that, during their evolution, humans
may have lost a protective system - or gained a dangerous one. This
hypothetical loss or gain would explain the fatty plaques which form in
almost everyone.
Careful comparisons between species have revealed that one
cholesterol-handling component, apo(a), is found only in humans and
hedgehogs. Apo(a) can attach both to fatty droplets in blood and to the
walls of arteries, suggesting that it might actually help fatty plaques to
form.
Is human possession of this protein the key to our lethal sensitivity to
fatty food? To test this idea, researchers have used genetic engineering to
create a further strain of mouse which has human apo(a) in addition to its
own mouse proteins.
On low-fat diets the animals are fairly healthy but, if fed on western-type
food, they develop obvious atherosclerosis. Future work will aim to
establish why humans have apo(a) and if its function can be antagonised
usefully by drugs.
The logic behind this work is essentially the same as that underlying the
earliest advances of pathology: guess at the cause of a disease, reproduce
this cause in a healthy animal to see if the disease develops, then try to
cure the disease by antagonising that cause. The innovation is the
application of genetic engineering to this strategy.
