
THE prospect of Greater Manchester and the north-west region hosting the
2000 Olympic Games is dominating discussion in the local tourism industry.
What are the attractions of the area when there are no sporting events to
watch? What are the entertainments in the evenings? What is there to do at
weekends? Are there enough quality hotel rooms? Are there good restaurants?
Manchester has been developing its tourism assets and attractions for some
years. As with other old manufacturing cities, like Glasgow, it has realised
tourism can become an important services sector, a good revenue-earner and a
large employer.
Manchester is well endowed with restaurants. The city claims it is possible
to eat in a restaurant offering different national cuisine every evening for
a month. Every taste and style is catered for - Mexican, Indonesian,
Armenian, Korean, Japanese, Turkish, Nepalese, Persian, Indian, Chinese,
Greek, French and Italian. Chinese cooking is dominant, because Manchester
has an extensive Chinatown, which is colourful and bustles at night. The
area has 60 restaurants.
As an indicator of quality, the city has 14 restaurants listed on the Good
Food Guide, a leading UK restaurant monitor.
There are Victorian public houses, numerous wine bars and some famous
breweries.
For entertainment, Manchester has more theatres than any other regional
centre, and more than any UK city outside London. There are five repertory
theatres, including the internationally-recognised Royal Exchange Theatre
and Contact, a theatre for young people.
The Palace Theatre (2,000 seats) and Opera House (2,000 seats), two of the
most commercially successful theatres outside London, are principal
destinations for touring opera, ballet and theatre companies.
For 1994, Manchester has been designated the UK's City of Drama which will
mean a celebration of international music and drama over 12 months.
For classical music lovers Manchester has two world renowned orchestras, the
Halle and the BBC Philharmonic, plus several chamber orchestras.
Both main orchestras are embarking on new, innovative programmes under their
musical directors Kent Nagano (the Halle) and Sir Peter Maxwell Davies (the
BBC Philharmonic). An international concert hall with a capacity of 2,400 is
under construction and will provide a high quality home for the Halle.
In the 1970s and 1980s, Manchester developed as a main centre for popular
music. The Hacienda club became nationally renowned. Well known bands such
as Simply Red, New Order, Take That and the Stone Roses came from
Manchester. The G-Mex exhibition centre, a converted railway station stages
large concerts.
There are a number of museums and art galleries and a higher than average
number of libraries. These include the Central Library and the John Rylands
Museum, home of a superb collection of manuscripts, incunabula and rare
first editions.
In sport, Greater Manchester has eight football league clubs, one of which,
Manchester United, recently won the premier league. Rugby league is also
popular in the region with Salford and Wigan among the most successful
clubs. Old Trafford is the home of the Lancashire Cricket Club.
To these attractions Manchester has added, in recent years, two specific
tourism 'products'. Visitors to Granada Studios Tours enjoy guided tours of
film and TV sets and walk along the Coronation Street set. Opposite the
studios is Granada's Victoria and Albert Hotel, a television themed hotel.
Around 750,000 people visit the studios annually. The Museum of Science and
Industry is, like Granada's studios, in Castlefield, an old part of
Manchester which went into decline but is now being restored.
In all, Greater Manchester attracts 3.5m staying visitors a year, of which
more than 40 per cent are overseas visitors. These visitors spend around
Pounds 238m a year. There are 6m day visitors who spend Pounds 41m on the
main attractions.
In Greater Manchester there are more than 200,000 hotel beds in more than
300 hotels. Greater Manchester is well placed for first class hotels. There
are 20 hotels of international standard in the city including the Midland,
one of Holiday Inn's Crowne Plaza brand, the Portland Thistle, and the
Ramada Renaissance Hotel. There is a another group around the airport
including a Hilton, Forte Crest and a Four Seasons.
The key question is: How would a successful Olympics bid affect the tourism
infrastructure? Could it cope? Are there enough hotel rooms for the influx
of visitors? An impact study undertaken by KPMG Management Consulting
estimates that over the 17 days of the Olympics there could be 5.65m visits.
The total spend generated by the Olympics would be about Pounds 250m.
The point to be made here is that it is not just Manchester that is bidding
for the Games but the north-west region as a whole. Some of the events will
be taking place in Liverpool, others in north Wales.
Ms Elizabeth Jeffries, chief executive of the Greater Manchester Visitor and
Convention Bureau, says: 'There would be no problem at all with hotel rooms.
Manchester is surrounded by country house hotels, and there is Liverpool and
Blackpool, not to mention Leeds. These places are all on the rail network.'
The fact that it is a regional bid within a national bid should enhance its
prospects. Mr John Glester, a member of the bid committee and chief
executive of the Central Manchester Development Corporation, says that while
Manchester itself might be unglamourous, Britain, as a whole, is not.
Some of the most attractive parts of the country are in the north-west. The
Peak National Park, the Yorkshire Dales, the Lake District are all within
two hours' drive of Manchester on good roads.
Ms Jeffries is hoping that win or lose, the publicity surrounding the bid
will help increase the number of tourists.
She says: 'We have a target to uplift business visitors by 5 per cent a year
for the next three years, and to increase staying visitors to the region by
10 per cent a year. We have done well, but we still have a number of hidden
assets that we should use.'
