
IN MANY bars and night clubs in the far east almost every other bottle of
spirits sold is a counterfeit, according to international investigator Wayne
Grant.
'The usual trick is to supply the first bottle of the correct spirits -
usually a brand of cognac. Then when the clients have had plenty to drink
and they order another the bartenders substitute a bottle of cheap brandy
made in Cyprus, Spain or elsewhere in a bottle expertly disguised as the
real thing,' said Grant.
Grant International tracks down the counterfeiters and supplies the
appropriate law enforcement agency with enough information to apprehend
them.
It is a highly specialised - and often dangerous - task, but one to which
Grant, a 6ft 2ins 19-stone former Thames Valley Police detective - is well
suited.
'When I entered the force as a 19 year-old 29 years ago I had absolutely no
idea that I would end up controlling a company with a turnover of Pounds
1.8m and a staff of 85,' Grant said.
'In many ways I still do not regard myself as a particularly good
businessman. It just so happened that I was fascinated with the process of
investigation, and when I was offered the chance to come out of the force at
the age of 31 and join an international cigarette company as a security
specialist it was an offer I couldn't refuse.
'After that it was a matter of luck, and the fact that to do my job well I
had to build up a bank of information that has subsequently proved valuable
to many major manufacturers of the world's fastest moving commodities.' That
information has been the key to the Grant success story.
Grant stayed with Rothmans for four years. During that time he decided to
form his own specialised international investigation agency.
In 1980 Grant used half his Pounds 3,000 severance pay to travel to the US
and sign two cigarette companies as his first clients. Grant International
now has more than 60 clients in various industries who pay retainers ranging
from Pounds 12,000 to Pounds 70,000 a year.
In that first year Grant calculates that he travelled round the world 20
times, while his wife Carole dealt with the administration from the family
home in Bicester.
Turnover in the first year was Pounds 187,000, of which more than half was
profit. It was achieved not only through negotiating retainers but also
through much directed (specific investigations) work.
It was a good beginning - and gave Grant a cash base on which to build the
company.
'The main problem in that year was keeping up with my sleep, and explaining
to my bank, in what was then a small country town, why I had such a huge
appetite for cash,' Grant said. Even in those days one week's travel budget
could total as much as Pounds 10,000.
As most of the international companies he was trading with paid on a 60-day
basis Grant International had cash flow problems in the early years. 'Once
the bank realised just exactly what I was doing it as good as gold,' Grant
said. 'Unlike many small businessmen I can honestly say I have experienced
nothing but help from my bank, Lloyds.'
Turnover roughly doubled in each of the first 10 years, but growth has
tailed off slightly since 1989.
'For the past four years we have added roughly Pounds 100,000 to our
turnover each year, which our accountant says is very satisfactory,' said
Grant. 'Our profit before tax in our last trading year was Pounds 550,000 on
a turnover of Pounds 1.8m.'
Grant said the slowdown was not due to the recession, but because in some
sectors he had reached saturation point.
It is possible to expand, however, by undertaking more directed work for
individual clients. This is because counterfeiting is a growth industry,
particularly since the opening up of the former the USSR.
Grant International works for all the 28 largest liquor producers in the
world and for most of the large cigarette manufacturers.
The biggest decision each year is which industries to enter to expand the
Grant operation. This year the new industry was food. There was also an
expansion of work for manufacturers of crystal jewellery.
In both industries the growing problem is not so much one of counterfeiting
as one of the 'grey market,' otherwise known as parallel trading. Many large
producers export the same goods at different prices to different countries.
But this means that local traders can, often quite legally, divert the goods
and make a profit. 'For many years this has been a big problem with
industries such as tobacco, drinks and confectionery, all of which depend on
a high volume and comparatively low price products,' Grant said.
The task for Grant International therefore is to pinpoint the 'culprits' and
advise client companies of ways of overcoming the leakage.
Grant has paid employees and contract staff in some 30 countries who act,
chiefly, as intelligence gatherers.
'A very high proportion of the work is the stuff of which day-to-day
detective work is made from: hard, intelligent, day-to-day grind, with the
spark and the inspiration to know when to act on a hunch,' Grant said. 'Six
of our 15 headquarters staff in Bicester and a good proportion of our
overseas employees are former police. There is nothing quite like a police
training in this sort of work.'
Grant has been present at a dozen or so big raids, but many of his staff
never see such drama. Their lives are spent on the end of a phone or at a
computer screen, talking to and paying local contacts and analysing data
such as export statistics, a surprising amount of which is public
information - if you know where to find it.
Nevertheless there can be risks. Two years ago two of his investigators were
killed and a third seriously injured in Mexico when a lorry drove into their
car on a mountain road. They were investigating a swindle involving the
resale of cheap white rum.
Grant's nightmare is the unsuccessful raid. 'The worst thing I can imagine
is spending tens of thousands of pounds of clients' money, involving the
local police and customs authorities, only to go in and find it's the
genuine stuff,' he said.
'But I would be very surprised if it happened. We proudly proclaim that we
have bought a successful outcome to every enquiry bought to us. But we could
be set up. It is a good reason for remaining on our toes ...'
International, 85-87, Churchill Road, Bicester, Oxon, OX6 7UR Tel:
0869-245815.
