
WORLD DEMAND for iron ore has picked up this year after being very depressed
in 1992, and next year should see further rises in demand and trade,
according to government and business experts from 31 iron ore producing and
consuming countries.
The experts, who met this week in Geneva under the auspices of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, noted weak economic activity in
Europe and Japan but higher demand from other steel producing countries,
especially China and South Korea. A rise in steel scrap prices this year has
also boosted iron ore deliveries.
Mr Dong Zhi Xiong, vice-president of the Beijing-based China Metallurgical
Import and Export Corporation, the country's biggest iron ore importer, told
the meeting that with an expected economic growth rate of 8 to 9 per cent a
year for the rest of the decade China would produce at least 100m tonnes of
crude steel by the year 2000. This would require, on conservative estimates,
imports of 45m to 50m tonnes annually, compared with 25m tonnes last year.
Chinese iron ore production has almost doubled from 118m tonnes to nearly
210m tonnes between 1978 and 1992, responding to an annual growth rate of
crude steel production of 6.9 per cent. As well as being the world's largest
iron ore producer, China last year overtook Japan and Russia to become the
largest pig iron producer, with about 20 per cent of its 76m-tonne
production coming from ore imports.
Although the world steel market has grown by just 1.8 per cent in the first
nine months of 1993, iron ore production is also rising and, on the eve of
annual price negotiations, the outlook is for further modest growth. The
experts noted that, in sharp contrast to late 1992, there was greater
activity in most steel market segments and prices for most steel products
had risen more than once over the past nine months.
World demand for iron ore slumped last year, accompanied by tumbling iron
ore prices, resulting in a decline of Dollars 700m in producers' export
earnings. World production fell by 5 per cent to 903m tonnes, the biggest
drop (18.5 per cent) being in the former Soviet Union, which in 1991 was
still the biggest producer.
