
THE issue of North Korea's suspected nuclear weapons programme, which
appeared to be approaching a resolution a few months ago, has become
contentious again following Pyongyang's announcement yesterday that it is
withdrawing from the nuclear non-proliferation treaty.
North Korea is believed to have started its nuclear research project in the
mid-1960s as part of the juche (self-reliance) ideology of President Kim
Il-sung to create an independent defence capability. The North Korean leader
worried that he could no longer rely on Soviet military backing, after the
fiasco of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, if a second Korean war broke out.
It was similar concerns about US military commitment to South Korea in the
1970s that persuaded Seoul to try to develop a nuclear weapon, although the
programme was eventually abandoned under US pressure.
Mr Tai Sung An, a respected US-based analyst of North Korea, argues that the
country is seeking several objectives in its nuclear weapons programme. They
include improving its negotiating leverage with South Korea and its allies,
the US and Japan, and 'offsetting its looming loss of conventional military
superiority relative to South Korea by building a nuclear strategic
equaliser.'
Mr Kim Il-sung has developed a paranoid fear of nuclear attack from the US
ever since that option was discussed during the Korean war 40 year ago, he
says. The main goal of the North Korean nuclear programme is 'to deter
nuclear attack from the United States by developing a local balance of
nuclear terror on the Korean peninsula.'
As North Korea became increasingly isolated from its Russian and Chinese
allies in the post-cold war period, it has expanded its facilities at the
Yongbyon nuclear complex, 60 miles from Pyongyang, in an apparently
accelerated effort to acquire a nuclear weapon.
It operates two small reactors at the site and is building a bigger
50-megawatt unit. It is also constructing what appears to be a large nuclear
fuel reprocessing plant to extract weapons-grade plutonium from the spent
nuclear fuel generated from the reactors.
However, there were also indications that Pyongyang realised its nuclear
weapons programme was proving counterproductive as its economy deteriorated.
Its need for foreign investment from South Korea, the US and Japan to revive
the economy led it to make apparent concessions on the nuclear issue to
reduce suspicions blocking ties with these countries.
It signed a non-nuclear pact with South Korea in late 1991 and agreed to
allow scheduled inspections by the International Atomic Energy Agency last
spring in belated compliance with its signing of the treaty in 1985.
But progress became bogged down after Seoul wanted to conduct challenge
inspections of suspected but undisclosed nuclear facilities, while the IAEA
demanded last month a special inspection of two buildings in the Yongbyon
complex that it believed contained plutonium. The IAEA request pushed
Pyongyang towards renouncing the treaty.
The obvious conclusion to draw from Pyongyang's action is that it has
accumulated plutonium and feared that the IAEA would discover it. The US and
Japanese governments claim that North Korea has already stockpiled enough
plutonium to make at least one or two nuclear bombs.
Japanese officials estimate that North Korea has extracted between 16kg and
24kg of weapons-grade plutonium.
But there are other explanations for North Korea's apparently rash response.
One is that the nuclear programme has become a key issue in power struggle
between hardliners and reformers in Pyongyang. While the reformers were in
the ascendant last year and successfully pushed for nuclear concessions in
return for foreign investment, the hardliners might be gaining power now.
There has also been speculation recently that Kim Il-sung is seriously ill,
which might have triggered a political fight.
Another explanation is that officials fear public discontent as the economy
collapses and are creating a crisis atmosphere about a US threat, in the
form of the current Team Spirit military exercise, to rally support behind
the regime.
Pyongyang's growing isolation from the outside world may be strengthening
its resolve to resist what it perceives as intrusions on its sovereignty,
which it accused the IAEA of doing with its inspection demands.
Russian and Chinese diplomats recently cited this reason in warning that the
West should not press North Korea too much on the nuclear issue and deny it
room for diplomatic manoeuvring and the ability to save face.
