
It was really Hildegard Behrens' concert at the Royal Festival Hall on
Tuesday - the London Philharmonic was there too, but only to accompany her
in Wagner and Strauss, and to supply a prelude. The latter was Mahler's full
string-band version (1894) of Schubert's 'Death and the Maiden' Quartet.
This curiosity, reconstructed from Mahler's annotations on a printed quartet
score, has become unaccountably popular among conductors.
None of them manages to make massed violins sound remotely plausible in the
high, flickering descants of the Allegro. That was the sort of thing Mahler
would soon be writing for first-violin sections in his own symphonies, but
in Schubert it sounds grotesque. Here, the brave collective effort sometimes
swallowed up the main tunes on lower strings, as a solo leader could never
do. The conductor Franz Welser-Most ensured that all of it was at least
'interesting', with enough dynamic hairpins to supply an Expressionist
hairdresser for several weeks.
In the great Tristan und Isolde Prelude he achieved smoothness and musical
efficiency, nothing much like erotic anguish or desperate surges (loud, yes;
desperate, no). Then Miss Behrens took up the 'Liebestod', initially in
tremulous or perhaps just curdled tones: hard to be sure which] Concluding a
strenuous performance of the whole opera, the effect might seize one's
heart; but Isolde must soar at last in the 'Liebestod' - and Miss Behrens
did not, because the voice exerted no rhythmic grip of its own. Soaring
needs a firm springboard. 'Mild und leise' to a fault, the Behrens soprano
floated loosely, with too many consonants disappearing altogether over
Welser-Most's fluent accompaniment.
The special virtue, or confluence of virtues, that has justified Miss
Behrens' career is that her fine, unshowy intelligence complements a voice
which is soft-grained, and yet large and penetrating enough to compete in
heroic roles with steelier sopranos. In the Salome peroration she was
grandly audible throughout the orchestral eruptions, but also palpably
feminine and vulnerable - no ferocious Brunnhilde overtones, such as turn
many an operatic Salome into an obsessed monster. (That is meant as a
musico-biological observation, not a 'sexist' remark.) Behrens conveyed a
lethal passion with impassioned innocence.
