
GIB GROUP, the retailer which is Belgium's biggest private-sector employer,
is to cut 3,300 full-time jobs in its nationwide supermarket chain over the
next three years.
The news came as another of Europe's big employers, Automobiles Peugeot,
confirmed that it would be cutting its workforce by about 7 per cent by the
end of next year.
Yesterday's announcement from GIB came as the Belgian government, unions and
employers prepared for a testing round of talks aimed at restoring the
competitiveness of Belgian companies. If the talks fail, the country's
fragile centre-left coalition could fall.
GIB said 4,600 of the 17,000 full-time and part-time employees of the GIB
supermarket chain would lose their jobs. Most of those will be encouraged to
take early retirement, or will simply not be replaced if they leave the
group. The company said the cuts in its supermarket activities would free
BFr5bn (Dollars 144.5m) of new funds.
GIB has blamed increased competition and increasingly high wage costs for
putting the chain's future in jeopardy, in spite of cost-cutting over the
last three years.
Overall, GIB employs just over 57,000 people directly, and 70,000 including
franchises. Its activities include specialised retailing, do-it-yourself
shops and fast food restaurants.
In France, Automobiles Peugeot, part of the Peugeot-Citroen car group, said
its cost-cutting plan would involve the loss of 4,023 jobs.
The decision, which was prompted by the depressed state of the European car
market, is the latest in a series of job cuts by French industry. The past
week has seen the announcement of more than 15,000 job losses, mainly by
publicly-owned companies, prompting Mr Edouard Balladur, the prime minister,
to urge restraint on the part of industry.
At Peugeot, the planned cuts included 2,547 jobs at the company's Mulhouse,
Sochaux, Lille, Sept Fons and St Etienne plants.
At Poissy, to the west of Paris, where the Peugeot 306 is manufactured,
there will be 1,476 job losses.
Industry analysts said they expected further job cuts at French car and
component manufacturers over the next few months.
