
The Bundesbank surprised European financial markets yesterday by announcing
a quarter of a percentage point cut in the securities repurchase agreement,
the 'repo' rate which determines money market interest rates, without
delivering cuts in the 'official' Lombard and discount rates.
Meeting for the penultimate time this year, the bank's policy-making council
fixed the repo rate at 6 per cent for the next five weeks, down from 6.25
per cent.
Although markets were initially disappointed at the decision not to trim the
internationally sensitive discount rate, the repo rate cut was enough to
trigger easing in other European countries.
The Dutch and Belgian central banks announced they would cut rates from
today. Dutch official rates will be cut by a quarter of a point and Belgian
rates by between a quarter and half a point.
In Germany, economists said the move to maintain the repo rate at 6 per cent
over the five weeks to January 5 maintained the momentum of cuts in German
interest rates while still signalling caution about the pace of monetary
easing.
'It shows very clearly that the will to cut interest rates further is very
strong,' said Mr Adolf Rosenstock, chief economist of the German arm of the
Industrial Bank of Japan. 'On the other hand it indicates that they have no
wish to endanger their credibility as they may have done with a large cut in
the discount rate.'
Mr Kermit Schoenholtz, at Salomon Brothers International in London, said the
move 'sets the stage for another official rate cut, most likely in early
1994 if not before'.
The move comes against a background of slowing inflation and economic
stagnation in Germany, conditions conducive to further rate cuts. The rate
of growth in broad money, the M3 indicator watched as an indicator of
inflationary developments, is slowing but is still outside the target range.
The Bundesbank's policy-making council will set its target for M3 growth at
its meeting on December 16. In November, M3 grew at an annualised,
seasonally adjusted rate of 6.8 per cent, above the central bank's 6.5 per
cent ceiling.
See currencies and money page
