
THE US and North Korea have agreed on speedy resumption of talks between
Pyongyang and the International Atomic Energy Agency designed to pave the
way for international inspections of two suspect North Korean nuclear sites.
But the US failed to secure a pledge that North Korea would allow IAEA
inspections of the sites, at the Yongbyon nuclear complex. Mr Robert
Gallucci, assistant US secretary of state, admitted there was 'more work to
do' but said yesterday's agreement was a 'step in the right direction.'
The agreement came at a second round of bilateral discussions in Geneva. A
third round of talks is planned within the next two months.
North Korea will continue to suspend its decision in March to withdraw from
the 1968 Nuclear Non-Proliferation treaty, which forbids non-nuclear states
from acquiring nuclear weapons and requires IAEA inspections to guard
against diversion of nuclear materials for weapons use.
In an agreed statement, the two sides said North Korea was 'prepared to
begin consultations with the IAEA on outstanding safeguards and other issues
as soon as possible.' Mr Kang Sok Chu, North Korea's first deputy foreign
minister, said these consultations would include Pyongyang's insistence on
IAEA impartiality. North Korea has cited IAEA bias as grounds for refusing
access to the two buildings where the agency believes plutonium may be
stored.
The statement reaffirms in general terms US pledges not to use force against
a peaceful North Korea, but Pyongyang did not secure the assurance it
apparently wanted that next year's joint US/South Korean 'Team Spirit'
military exercises would be dropped.
The statement also calls for talks between North and South Korea as soon as
possible on the nuclear and other bilateral issues. Mr Kang said North Korea
was proposing a high-level meeting to pave the way for a summit.
In a surprise development, the US has agreed in principle to help North
Korea convert its nuclear power stations from graphite moderated reactors to
light-water moderated reactors. Mr Gallucci said this was conditional on
North Korea being 'in full compliance with the NPT regime,' including
inspections.
Mr Gallucci said light water reactors were more 'proliferation-resistant'
than 'provocative' graphite moderated reactors, because they required
importation of enriched uranium and thus made countries dependent on the
political goodwill of suppliers.
