
My abiding memory of Marilyn Horne will be of a curtain-call at Covent
Garden a couple of years ago. Amid enthusiastic applause there was one man
who kept booing insistently from upstairs. The redoubtable Miss Horne
marched to the front of the stage, stopped the applause and defied him to
'Come on down]' - then, having silenced him, raised her fist in the air and
marched off in triumph.
That was at a performance of Rossini's La donna del lago. Sadly we shall not
be seeing any more of Marilyn Horne in her famed Rossini roles. The Royal
Opera's revival of L'italiana in Algeri, which opened on Saturday, is her
last Rossini opera on stage, not just in London, but anywhere. For more than
30 years she has been a formidable heroine (and hero in trousers) in so many
of this composer's operas, expert at knowing how to shape his slow music,
exciting in the coloratura, ready to fire her booming chest register like a
cannon when she was roused.
Most of those facilities are still available to her, though she has to
husband her resources carefully these days. Top notes have to be approached
very gingerly and phrases that move up through the voice are apt to waver
out-of-tune. To the qualities outlined earlier, I would add here that she
has the gift of keeping the longest vocal lines going somewhere and that her
exactitude of rhythm is exemplary. Decades of polishing each Rossini
semiquaver have kept them sparkling as new.
As the Italian girl in Algiers, she gives a star performance, with all that
that implies. Mobility is visibly painful for her, but Horne's Isabella
keeps joy on her face, resourcefulness in her spirit, while mugging almost
all the comic moments to excess.
The Mustafa whom she captivates is Ruggero Raimondi - hair slicked back,
long black whiskers, glinting eyes, plenty to remind us that a once
formidable Don Giovanni is hiding under the Turkish cloak and baggy
trousers. His way with the music is casual, as is his wont. In contrast, no
care was too great for Bruce Ford in Lindoro's opening aria of love, which
he floated as gently as a kiss on the breeze; he has become a most appealing
Rossini tenor. Alessandro Corbelli repeated his amusing Taddeo and Carlo
Rizzi kept the whole ensemble firmly in hand from the pit.
If only the production understood wit as well as it does comedy. This is the
Ponnelle staging which opens with a gaggle of grotesque eunuchs (what is the
collective noun?) embroidering tasselled curtains. I did not recall that
they return at the end sporting false red noses and silly walks, but fear I
shall never be able to forget it now. The humour seems to have grown cruder
with the years, as when Isabella floors Mustafa with a right hook at the end
of the first act.
Or perhaps that is just in character for a Rossini mezzo who has always been
a knock-out. Incidentally, I am told that the unsatisfied customer at La
donna del lago did go down to Marilyn Horne's dressing-room afterwards to
tell her to her face why he had been booing: a brave man, or a foolish one.
