
Mercury, the main competitor to British Telecommunications, is taking the
industry's watchdog to court in the first legal action to be pursued against
a regulator of the former state utilities.
Mercury claims that Oftel, the telecoms regulator, has not offered it
reasonable terms for the carriage of its traffic by BT, through a consistent
misinterpretation of BT's licence.
The legal challenge reflects Mercury's mounting frustration at the impact of
the current inter-connection regime on its ability to compete against BT.
Mercury, a long-distance carrier with about 10 per cent of the UK telecom
market, uses BT's network to deliver most of its calls to their final
destination. It pays BT on a per-minute basis, using BT's charge bands.
Mercury wants Oftel to introduce a radically different structure, based on
network capacity, which it claims would enable it to break free of BT's
tariff structure. Mr Mike Harris, Mercury's chief executive, said: 'We are
determined to use every means possible to break BT's dominance. On this
occasion, it means using the courts.'
Earlier this month, Oftel settled a long-running dispute between BT and
Mercury on interconnection terms, reducing the amount paid by Mercury.
Oftel refused to shift the basis of payment to capacity-based charging. It
is examining the future of the interconnection regime separately, and has
invited Mercury to submit detailed proposals. It claims Mercury has yet to
do so.
Mercury is not attempting to challenge Oftel's recent settlement. Instead it
is seeking a declaratory judgment from the High Court which, if successful,
will form the basis for its next inter-connection agreement with BT,
negotiations for which are expected to start next year.
Mr Don Cruickshank, Oftel director-general, told an FT conference earlier
this month that he wanted to move towards a pricing regime for
interconnection which left competitors unconstrained by BT's own tariff
structure. Mercury said yesterday it was not prepared to wait the 'few
years' it would take him to implement changes.
