
Hills Precision Components originated as Charles Hill & Co in 1919 and
specialised in the manufacture of die-castings for the automotive industry.
It started manufacturing plastic components for cars in 1954 in Coventry.
Since 1992, it is 25 per cent-owned by Peugeot Talbot UK and 75 per
cent-owned by the French component manufacturer ECIA, itself majority-owned
by Peugeot France.
Nature of Business: Manufacture of components for the automotive industry,
including soft trim and plastics, which go to make up complete seats,
facias, steering wheels and door panels. HPC delivers complete sub-assembled
seats and facias to Peugeot Talbot at Ryton. which accounts for 75 per cent
of its turnover, but other customers include Jaguar Cars, Rover, Honda and
Massey Ferguson.
Turnover: Pounds 35m in 1992, pounds 27m in 1991.
Employees: 400, based at the factory in Stoke, Coventry.
Key personnel: Bill Farmer, managing director. Bill McGilvray, supply
manager.
TECHNOLOGY FILE
Software: The Data 3 manufacturing system provides a central pool of
information to every department in the company, including production and
sales and marketing. Data 3 is at the centre of HPC's adooption of
Just-In-Time manufacturing techniques.
Hardware: IBM AS400 D45, supporting up to 40 terminals. It has
communications links with parent systems in France, including a mainframe.
The computer is soon to be upgraded as a result of adding financial,
forecasting, receiving and engineering systems: remote links have also
slowed response time.
Supplier: Hoskyns, the UK consultancy owned by French software house CGS,
implemented and supported the original Data 3. Hoskyns is the UK agent for
the ASK Group, owner of Data 3, a US-based specialist in manufacturing
software. The French ASK agent, Unilog, has customised Data 3 for HPC's
parent group, and HPC now uses the French version to keep in step with other
European users in the same group.
Value of system: Pounds 150,000 per year. (Local AS400 terminals etc). Pouns
35,000 software licence per annum.
