
BREAD-WHEAT CROPS around the world have been hit by bad weather for the
second year running, milling industry sources report. Harvests that have
been delayed or spoiled by cold, wet conditions are arriving on the market
with quality well below normal. Tight supplies in Europe are driving up
prices of high protein bread-grain - ironically in a year when price cuts
were expected to result from the reform of the European Community's common
agricultural policy.
When milling wheat crops ran into trouble last year, exporting countries
were lucky to have large stocks of high quality grain to eke out from
previous good harvests in 1991. Prices rose to levels unseen for some years
as stores were stripped almost bare but few customers went short. However,
as UK milling giant, RHM summed up last July: 'We can't afford any more crop
problems in 1993'.
It is not only the northern hemisphere suppliers that are short of good
quality bread-wheat - Australia had a rain-damaged crop last season and is
still some weeks away from its next harvest. Although Australian quality
looks much better this year, prices for its 'prime hard' high protein wheats
are already Dollars 50 a tonne more than they were last summer, following
the world trend.
High protein wheat is essential for millers producing the typical 'Anglo
Saxon' loaf - firm and aerated, ideal for wrapping and slicing. The protein
gives strength and elasticity to the bubbles that form as wheat dough is
baked, enabling the bread to rise and hold shape.
Despite the enormous advance in UK self-sufficiency in bread-wheat since it
joined the EC in the early 1970s (it usually grows between 2.5m and 3m
tonnes of its own 'soft' or lower protein bread-wheats), some hard, high
protein imported wheat is vital to get the right dough mix.
Some continental millers are better off than their UK counterparts; the
typical French loaf can get by on much less protein but the quality
shortages and the scramble for supplies is affecting prices for all.
Normally UK millers count on Canada to fill a protein gap of about 250,000
tonnes. But Canada's crops have been hit by early snowfalls and delayed by
weeks of wet and wintry weather. Average protein content of its top wheat
grades has dropped from a normal 14.5 per cent to just above I3 per cent,
according to the Canadian Wheat Board.
Even for Canada's lower protein wheats, prices are sharply higher, currently
nudging Pounds 250 a tonne, delivered to UK mills. One leading UK miller
estimated that Canadian 13.5 per cent protein wheat - the least he could get
by on - would probably cost him Pounds 300 a tonne delivered. 'Basically,
for every tonne of Pounds 140-a-tonne UK bread-wheat we don't get, we will
have to put in some Pounds 300 Canadian wheat - if we can get it,' he
explained ruefully.
UK Ministry of Agriculture figures show that the proportion of UK wheat in
the millers 'grist' has already fallen to only 56 per cent from 83 per cent
this time last year. Leading UK grain merchants Dalgety, recently estimated
UK wheat proteins were also down by about 1 per cent this season, raising
costs and requiring the use of other inputs.
The US is an occasional hard-wheat supplier to Europe but is unlikely to
fill the Canadian shortfall, following rain and disease damage to much of
its spring planted bread-wheat (which has recently traded at 13-year highs).
Millers will therefore have to scour continental Europe for high protein
wheat, where they will find a very mixed picture.
Despite a reported 4m tonnes of milling wheat downgraded by bad weather to
animal feed, French farmers are reported to have plenty of 'quality' grain,
'but high proteins are not one of their strong points', one shipper pointed
out. Germany also has a mixed bag of good-to-rain-spoiled milling wheats but
merchants there are now demanding higher prices - reportedly leaving many of
their own millers short. Denmark and Spain, other frequent sources of
bread-wheats have also been unable to provide the right high quality grain
so far.
Another traditional option for millers short of high protein wheat is to
incorporate large quantities of wheat gluten - a by-product of starch
manufacture - to solve the 'bubble problem' in loaves made from lower
protein wheats. But - more bad news - thanks to Europe's recession and a
glut of cheap, competing potato starch, wheat starch production has
collapsed and wheat gluten supplies along with it.
American millers have meanwhile been snapping up dwindling European gluten
supplies to offset their own protein wheat shortfalls (US starch, made from
maize and its by-product, corn gluten, is only fit for animal feed). Anyone
who bought EC wheat gluten in June at Pounds 700 a tonne should be
celebrating - its price has since rocketed to Pounds l,590.
Crunch time comes early in 1994. Many of the big UK milling concerns will
then run out of the Canadian 1991 crop stocks they prudently bought forward
before this summer's wash-out, 'After that we're on to what comes out of the
1993 crops and it doesn't look good,' one summed up.
Weather and other factors have also made a mockery of much vaunted cost
benefits grain consumers expected from reforms of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade. 'Headline wheat price cuts of Pounds 59 per tonne have
simply not materialised due to the premiums quoted on bread-wheats (over
ordinary wheat),' one industry executive lamented.
'On top of that, many countries' domestic and imported prices have been
strengthened by weak currencies surrounding the ERM's (EC exchange rate
mechanism's) collapse.'
Even farmers may be robbed of profit from the rise in milling wheat values
because their bread-wheat crops failed to perform as expected, And there is
an ominous flip-side to this situation - a flood of cheap feed-wheat
sloshing around the European and world markets, pushing the export price
down to just Dollars 60 a tonne - its lowest for some years, Meanwhile, the
rise in bread-wheat prices shows no sign yet of levelling off.
