
In the emerging battle for the attention of Asia's television viewers, Star
Television, the Hong Kong-based satellite TV company, is no shrinking
violet.
Talk to senior Star executives and you will hear forecasts of dramatic
growth within the industry. They predict the number of broadcast TV channels
to expand from the current five 'free-to-air' channels to anything from 80
to 100, mostly pay channels, by 1996.
Underlying this outlook is a strategy of dominance in the skies - by seeking
to corner available, and soon to be available, satellite capacity - and on
the ground by tying down cable TV distributors. Company executives say money
is not a problem.
The main reason for this, they say, is Star's owner. Star is 50 per cent
owned by Mr Li Ka-shing, one of Hong Kong's wealthiest men, with the rest
owned by Hutchison Whampoa, which Mr Li also controls. Another reason is
that of the Dollars 600m committed in 1991 to Star and its sister company
Media Assets, which buys programming, only Dollars 360m has so far been
spent.
Star began broadcasting in May 1991 and by the end of the year it had five
'free-to-air' channels running 24 hours a day. According to research
commissioned by Star, by February this year more than 45m viewers, in 38
countries from China to Indonesia and Japan to Afghanistan, were tuning into
one of its five chan-nels.
It is these sort of figures that have attracted US and British media
companies. The initial interest from Mr Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation
and Pearson, the diversified UK conglomerate, was for equity participation
in Star TV itself.
These preliminary discussions are believed to have foundered on the issue of
control. Star executives say that Mr Li, for the foreseeable future, does
not want to cede control of the network to any outsider.
Mr Murdoch appears to have retreated to consider his next move, while
Pearson's current aim, these executives say, is now more modest. It could
result in joint venture deals for an English-language education channel -
which would dovetail well with Pearson's educational books expertise - and
co-operation on a planned business news channel.
Indeed Star's preferred relationship with potential partners is of the joint
venture type. Four of the five channels it currently broadcasts - BBC World
Service News, MTV, Prime Sports and a Mandarin Chinese station - are this
type of arrangement.
'We want to do partnership deals at channel level,' says Mr Julian Mounter,
Star's recently installed chief executive. 'We are talking to a lot of
people about equity in channels. There has been considerable interest in
wanting to invest in our free-to-air service, or our subscription service.'
By the end of this year, or early next year, Star plans to begin
broadcasting five more pay-TV channels. As satellite capacity expands so
Star plans to acquire the use of more transponders, or transmitters, and
push out more TV channels, especially pay channels.
'When we start subscription services we will be able to move from
pan-regional to a whole series of national opportunities,' Mr Mounter says.
Star is also investing in new broadcast technology - based on digital
compression - and may well be the first commercial broadcaster to use it.
Digital compression allows a single transponder to broadcast up to eight
separate TV channels at once.
The company currently broadcasts on an AsiaSat satellite - Hutchison owns a
third of AsiaSat, together with Cable and Wireless and Citic, Beijing's
international investment arm - where it has 11 transponders (of 24) and
exclusive rights to broadcast TV internationally.
AsiaSat plans to launch AsiaSat2 towards the end of 1994 or early 1995 and
APT Satellite, a mainland Chinese consortium, will launch Apstar2 around the
same time. Both satellites will have large 'footprints' - the area where a
TV signal can be received - covering up to 75 per cent of the world's
population and extending from Tokyo to Berlin and Ulan Bator to Hobart.
Star has an option to take eight transponders on AsiaSat2, of a total of 32.
It was recently reported that it has signed a Dollars 350m deal with APT to
lease 20 of Apstar2's 34 transponders. When asked if the report were true,
Mr Mounter was evasive, only saying: 'We have a deal with AsiaSat and
nothing has changed.'
In both cases, Star is believed to be seeking exclusive rights, thereby
squeezing out potential US and European competitors which might want to
start a rival network. But Star's position is not as strong as it may want
others to believe; it is based as much on weakness as it is on strength.
If Star is to realise its ambition to corner the market it will need the
outside capital which co-operative deals with other operators or programming
providers brings. The Li family may even have to consider outside equity
par-ticipation at the company level in addition to the channel level.
The costs of leasing transponders are high - Dollars 1.25m to Dollars 1.5m a
year each - and so is investment in new broadcast technology, such as
digital compression. Star is reluctant to talk about costs associated with
this and the cost of its back-up satellite link station in Thailand.
An indication of size of the start-up costs and their impact on a large
company was given in 1991 when Hutchison, Star's joint owner, made a
controversial change to its accounting policies. For its telecoms and media
businesses it changed from the accepted accruals method of accounting to one
where costs and revenues are accounted for as they are paid or received.
Also, it decided to amortise start-up costs and expenses over periods of up
to 10 years.
Star will provide no details of its financial situation, including
advertising revenues. Mr Mounter claims that advertising revenues are
growing strongly. He also contends that Asia is a more homogeneous
advertising market than Europe. 'Asians have more of corporate view of life.
They do not have a resistance to pan-national campaigns,' he claims.
Star appears closer to cracking one early problem it encountered:
programming. There was early resistance to selling Star 'software' because
it was broadcast to so many countries. Providers were concerned that they
could not sell theirs in local markets.
'To distribute to 38 countries is expensive,' says Mr Mounter. 'The profit,
after expenses, of distributing to them all is small. So when they equate
what they can get from coming to a one-stop-shop like us with the
difficulties of revenue collection in Asia they are beginning to think
again.'
