
ON A SUNNY, humid early summer day in Salford, the Manchester Olympic bid
campaigners are talking to a group of London-based correspondents from
foreign news organisations on a two-day trip designed to show them that the
Manchester bid is a serious runner.
Correspondents from Pravda, Stuttgarter Zeiting, Business Times of Tanzania,
Die Zeit, Xinhua News Agency of China, Channel Nine Australia, Fulha do Sao
Paolo and El Sol do Mexico listen to the bid organisers setting out their
stall.
Mr Bob Scott, the bid director, tells them Manchester is the only city
bidding for a second time, with a greatly improved bid. Channel Nine of
Australia wants to know how Manchester will cope with the 'stigma' of being
'the only loser, bidding this time'.
Mr Scott remarks that Britain does not change it's bidding cities 'like we
change our underwear', a barb aimed at previous bids from Brisbane and
Melbourne. In any case, he says, Barcelona started bidding in 1924.
But, he acknowledges that Manchester has to deal with its unglamorous image,
in a competition where its main rival has a famous harbour, opera house and
bridge. In a picture postcard competition, the Free Trade Hall would not be
in the running.
'Being an unglamorous candidate, we have to become desirable, we have to
prove ourselves,' he says.
Within the UK, and especially in the south-east corner of England,
Manchester's traditional image is of a damp post-industrial city where it
rains much of the time and there is a lot of crime.
The optimists argue that the Manchester rain would not have much affect on
the games - 80 per cent of Olympic sports take place indoors.
The pessimists say it is the track and field events which people remember
and which are the big pull for television and ticket sales.
The rain argument is being conducted with some ferocity, with the bid's
supporters producing rainfall figures to show that the July/August period is
no rainier in Manchester than anywhere else and arguing that the city's
climate makes it the ideal place for records to be broken in the millennium
games.
Mr Tony Blenman, sports officer (Olympics) of the British Council, says the
image can be turned round - Manchester has a temperate climate, and its
post-industrial condition means there is a mature and thriving business
community that can fund a new city, and the infrastructure to support it.
The British Council, relocated last year from London to a gleaming new
building beside the city centre, has been active in the diplomatic offensive
to persuade people in the nearly 100 countries in which it operates that
there is another side to Manchester.
Bobby Charlton, former Manchester United and England captain and one of
Manchester's sporting ambassadors, attended this year's centenary
celebration for Argentina's football league and the opening of its football
season. He was mobilised to take part in a scratch embassy football team
which played an Argentine government team, led by President Menem.
In another goodwill gesture, the council helped Malaysia develop expertise
in lawn bowls and water sports for its successful Commonwealth Games bid.
Mr Blenman has tried to ensure that anyone walking into a British Council
office will see something about Manchester 2000, but there are difficulties.
The council has no budget for this kind of activity, and is suffering staff
and budget cuts. The Manchester bid does not have the resources to help out.
He and others concerned with Manchester's image know that many Britons who
travel abroad, and who may be discussing the Manchester bid, have never
visited the city and have an impression based on historic perceptions, and
Coronation Street.
Mr Bob Scott, the bid director, points out that people's concerns about
Manchester vary. A Londoner may be concerned about dirt, smoke and rain, a
Francophone African may be more concerned about its being cold, and about
people not speaking French. It is concerns such as these that the bid
committee addresses when IOC delegates are visiting.
He insists that the job is to destroy misconceptions rather than to improve
the image. He says the IOC members who visited in 1989/90 to assess the
abortive bid for the 1996 Games were pleasantly surprised. When they
returned this year, they saw that a lot had been done - the new airport
terminal built, the Metrolink integrated rail system built, Salford Quays
re-developed, the Victoria Arena, velodrome, and a concert hall under
construction. By September, when the bid decision is made, 71 of the 91 IOC
members will have visited Manchester.
He admits that there is always going to be a question mark about terrorism
in Britain - the IRA's high-profile mainland campaign has included attacks
in the Manchester area.
Manchester beat London in the contest to become Britain's bid city, partly
because the capital's infrastructure appeared unlikely to cope with the
strain of the Games. Mr David Baker, a retired Bank of England official who
is chief executive of Manchester Financial and Professional Forum, admits,
nevertheless, that 'In the south, it's still, 'How's your Olympic bid
coming?'. It's never 'our' Olympics.'
Some people with strong links in the capital say the feeling is changing. Mr
Nigel Pye and Mr Bernard Whewell, Manchester managing partners of Arthur
Andersen and Ernst & Young respectively, say the attitude among people they
speak to has changed from dismissal of Manchester's chance to a real desire
to discuss Manchester's chances.
For Mr Anthony Goldstone, chairman of the North West Tourist Board, this is
not enough.
'I would like to see more business people, chairmen and chief executives of
companies, talking the way I do,' he says. It would be a boost to the
region's confidence if company chairmen and bank directors joined in
promoting the bid.
