
ON Wednesday at the Spitalfields Festival, Richard Hickox and the Northern
Sinfonia played Shostakovich and Walton, and (despite support from the
Walton Trust) Shostakovich won. The Bear, Walton's hearty one-act opera
after Chekhov's rather subtler piece, was not ideally placed after
Shostakovich's 14th Symphony, which is desperately serious and scathing.
In fact the opera was excellently cast, with Della Jones singing a
larger-than-life Popova, the volatile widow with airs, and a gruff,
explosive Smirnov - who comes to collect a debt and ends by collecting
Popova instead - from Alan Opie. Both of them flung themselves into the
comedy with fervour bordering on frenzy. Yet we didn't laugh much. The
singers' diction was beyond reproach, but Walton's racketty little orchestra
(a small battalion of percussion, raucous muted brass) loomed just behind
them, and in the resonant Christ Church acoustic the instruments were
impossible to keep decently down.
Miss Jones and Opie soon found themselves belting out most of their music,
just to make it heard amid the roar. One wanted more half-lights, slyer
character - which they could certainly provide in a more singer-friendly
setting, and indeed in a staging: physical confrontation is essential to
this comedy, and face-pulling while they sang straight from the score made a
thin substitute. Adjusted to a proper theatre, this performance ought to be
delightful. It enjoyed the bonus of a very superior manservant, since the
bass Stephen Richardson was on hand for the Shostakovich anyway.
There he was greatly impressive, as was Miss Jones (and their Russian, too -
gutturally persuasive to an inexpert ear like mine, and used to biting
effect). The 'symphony' is a 1969 song-cycle on poems translated from Lorca,
Apollinaire and Rilke, and one by Wilhelm Kuchelbecker, all concerned with
death, persecution, lofty anger and grim despair. The vocal lines are etched
into an extraordinary small-orchestra score, bleakly spare strings frosted
with touches of celesta, vibes, xylophone, bells: an unforgettable
sub-Arctic sound world.
Hickox conducted it with cool, exact sympathy, and drew admirably sensitive
playing from the Northern Sinfonia. No risk here of overwhelming the
singers, who were left free to penetrate the songs in depth. Despite the
presiding tone of this disillusioned music, the range of bitter expression
is wide and varied, and both artists were in formidable command of it. After
the insights of their performance, I thought I might at last begin to
understand Shostakovich's hitherto opaque 15th Symphony.
