
EAGLE STAR, the general insurance subsidiary of BAT Industries, is
understood to be close to settling its long-running litigation with Banque
Bruxelles Lambert, the Belgian bank.
News of a possible settlement in the case, which concerns commercial
mortgage indemnity policies on property loans worth Pounds 220m, will
hearten the company after last week's defeat in a legal battle with a
Lloyd's syndicate.
Judge Diamond ruled in the Commercial Court last Thursday that Eagle Star
must pay Dollars 40m (Pounds 25.8m) in potential claims arising from a
reinsurance policy purchased by syndicate 640 in 1973.
In the BBL case, which centres on a disputed valuation of six properties, it
is believed that Eagle Star could pay around Pounds 100m to settle, although
this amount could be reduced following reinsurance recoveries. BBL brought
the case after Eagle Star failed to honour policies taken out on six loans
in 1989.
The settlement move follows the adjournment of the case last Tuesday in the
11th week of the hearing. Eagle Star will seek to expand its case against
the valuers of the six properties.
Losses on commercial and domestic mortgage indemnity policies have
contributed to Eagle Star's recent trading difficulties. Pre-tax losses were
Pounds 394m in 1991, and Pounds 66m in the first nine months of last year.
BAT Industries pumped Pounds 450m into the company to boost its solvency.
Mr Michael Heath, executive director, said Eagle Star would appeal in its
case against syndicate 640. Between 1973 and 1991 it paid out Dollars 25m to
syndicate 640, but in June 1991 refused to make any further payment, arguing
that claims could only be paid on the basis of a 'demonstrable legal
liability'.
Like a number of syndicates and insurance companies, syndicate 640 had
settled many of its claims arising from asbestosis under the terms of the
Wellington agreement, which allows insurers to compromise on and accelerate
claims to asbestosis sufferers. Eagle Star suspended payments following a
legal ruling involving another Lloyd's syndicate.
Eagle Star is also contesting claims from Lloyd's syndicate 727 on similar
grounds, although in this case the dispute has gone to arbitration. Mr Heath
said yesterday that the Lloyd's ruling would have no 'financial impact'.
