
ARGENTINA's film directors enjoy prestige, influence and an international
reputation to which few of their Latin colleagues can aspire. Directors,
such as Ms Maria Luisa Bemberg, are internationally respected. Mr Luis
Puenzo won an Oscar in 1986 for The Official Story. Mr Fernando Solanas won
a Cannes prize in 1988 as best director.
Directors have become the keepers of Argentina's conscience. Far too many
Argentines would prefer to forget about the people who 'disappeared' during
the 1976-83 military regime, or ignore the poverty and despair that economic
change is bringing.
The industry seems to be going through a renaissance. But the truth is that
Argentine cinema is perhaps facing the greatest crisis in its history. Like
everywhere else in the world, people are making fewer visits to the cinema
and watching videos or cable TV more.
The problem is that this trend has been more prominent in Argentina than in
most other countries. Twenty years ago, Argentina had more than 3,000
cinemas. Today it has about 260. In contrast, there are about 1,400 cable TV
companies, and video clubs proliferate on every street corner. Less than ten
years ago, a successful locally-made film could sell over more than 2m
tickets. Today a successful film sells 400,000 tickets. Few films sell more
than 100,000 tickets.
Mr Fernando Solanas, the angry old man of Argentine cinema, worries that
people who are not able to create their own images are too weak to defend
their own cultural identity. 'We are condemned to consuming images from
abroad, but there is no reciprocity. They do not accept out images.'
Still, Argentines remain great cinephiles. But instead of going to the
cinema they are watching films at home. The trouble is government film
subsidies are tied to the number of cinema tickets a film sells. The fewer
tickets sold, the less government money it gets. And government support is
vital to making films almost everywhere outside Hollywood.
Mr Luis Puenzo, who made TheOfficial Story and Old Gringo, gloomily predicts
that Argentina will not make much more than half a dozen movies this year.
In the postwar years, it turned out a film a week.
Films these days need international support. Mr Luis Cesar d'Angiolillo,
whose Matar el Abuelito was co-produced with Spanish TV, says: 'It's
difficult to make films in Argentina. For us, it's a very expensive
activity, although for the rest of the world our costs are very low.'
As well as money, these co-productions attract big names which help
independent productions compete with Hollywood films. Also,international
backing gives directors a chance to broaden their range. Puenzo made a
Dollars 15m film version of Albert Camus' The Plague in Buenos Aires,
starring William Hurt with 80 per cent of the Dollars 15m budget covered by
French producers. Maria Luisa Bemberg's new film, De Eso no se Habla (We
don't Talk About This), stars Marcello Mastroianni in an Argentine-Italian
co-production.
Argentine films tend to be bleak if not apocalyptic, with an occasional
tendency to becoming ponderous and prolix. Tristan Bauer's Despues de la
Tormenta - a film about despair, decay and poverty is as powerful as it is
depressing.
Luis Puenzo says he chose to set The Plague in contemporary Latin America
because, 'the plague is in the last instance, evil. This relates indirectly
to what happened to us with the military. The plague is an ambiguous,
hidden, ill-defined evil. The central theme of the book and the film is that
the plague always returns. The bacillus never dies.'
Mr Solanas dispensed with subtlety in his latest film El Viaje (The
Journey), a long-winded satire on modern Latin America. It tells the story
of a young man's search for his missing father. On his travels he encounters
Buenos Aires awash with greed and corruption. With the deft use of special
effects, the city is shown flooded with sewage.
Mr Solanas makes harsh criticisms of Mr Menem, who, predictably, is suing
him for slander. Solanas' career gives an idea of the skills Argentine
directors need to survive. In the 25 years since La Hora de los Hornos, his
first feature film, Mr Solanas was exiled for eight years and has made only
five other films. He says: 'A film maker is an organiser who has to do
everything. El Viaje was filmed in five countries and took five years to
make. I may not make another film for two years.'
Still, Argentina's film industry is unlikely to die. Mr Puenzo says 2,500
people are studying film making, plus countless thousands more studying
drama. And successful Argentine directors invariably come home. Mr Puenzo
says he wants his next project to be a low budget film made in Argentina,
spoken in Spanish, with Argentine actors and dealing with Argentine themes.
