
CONFLICTING signals emerged yesterday over the course of German monetary
policy when money supply exceeded the target range set by the Bundesbank for
the third month in a row.
Hopes that the central bank would be able to speed up its phased reduction
of interest rates were raised earlier in the day when the Bundesbank made a
deeper than expected cut in the minimum money-market securities repurchase
rate.
According to provisional figures released yesterday by the Bundesbank, the
M3 broad money measure climbed at an annualised, seasonally adjusted rate of
7.1 per cent in June.
On Tuesday night Mr Johann Gaddum, a member of the Bundesbank's directorate,
had said that the money supply target range of 3.5-5.5 per cent growth was
attainable, but conceded that progress towards the goal was not 'over the
hill'.
Coming after 6.9 per cent growth in May, yesterday's figure was both a
surprise and a disappointment for economists who had hoped for a lower
figure, perhaps within the 4.5-6.5 per cent target range.
The poor figures, reflecting growth in public sector borrowing, led
economists to predict that the Bundesbank would not move to cut headline
interest rates at next Thursday's meeting of the policy-making council, the
last time the council meets again before September.
Earlier in the day, however, the Bundesbank made a deeper than expected cut
in the repo rate, the rate at which the Bundesbank provides wholesale funds
for the market. It fell to 7.15 per cent, down from 7.28 per cent last week.
This was better than traders' expectations of a fall to 7.18-7.20 per cent
and brings the repo rate closer to the floor set by the discount rate,
currently at 6.75 per cent after being reduced by half a percentage point at
the beginning of July.
The latest Bundesbank monthly report said that a brightening of the monetary
environment was one reason for the generous cuts in the discount and Lombard
rate on July 1.
Talk of another July rate cut was sparked earlier this month by speculative
pressure on the French franc and Danish krona in the exchange rate mechanism
of the EMS.
But the speculative pressures have since abated, shifting the markets' focus
back to Germany's domestic monetary goals. 'With M3 running at such a high
level it will be difficult for the Bundesbank to justify any further cuts,'
said Mr Hermann Remsperger, chief economist at the BHF-Bank yesterday. The
figures showed that lending to businesses and private individuals rose at a
seasonally-adjusted annualised rate of 7.5 per cent in the first half of
year.
'The chance of another rate cut is virtually zero now,' said Mr Klaus
Baader, UBS Phillips & Drew economist in London.
The Federation of German Banks said that a further rate cut would encourage
economic growth in Germany, which is mired in recession, but it said the
central bank had to move carefully because of stubbornly high inflation and
the need to maintain confidence in the D-Mark. German bankers are concerned
that if rate cuts came too rapidly the D-Mark would come under pressure.
A central factor behind the unexpected increase in M3 was a rise in foreign
currency assets of the banking sector.
The reason for this puzzled economists, but Ms Alison Cottrell of Midland
Global Markets Research in London said it probably reflected the effects of
the Bundesbank's previous currency market intervention.
Meanwhile, the next provisional inflation figures are likely to show
consumer prices rising at 4.3 per cent, up from 4.2 per cent in June and
more than twice the Bundesbank's long-term target of 2 per cent.
