
THE WEDDING BANQUET (15) Ang Lee
SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE (PG) Nora Ephron
THE FUGITIVE (12) Andrew Davis
BOILING POINT (15) James B. Harris
IN THE SOUP (15) Alexandre Rockwell
By Nigel Andrews
Cinema's PR industry has its own form of shotgun wedding. When it likes the
sound of two words together, it forces them to unite for life. Thirty years
ago word-marriages like 'spinechilling,' 'bloodcurdling' and 'ribtickling'
were the stuff of promo language. Large with hyperbole, armed with the
warheads of exclamation marks, they hurtled out from the screen towards us
in movie trailers. Today's favourite compound, more suited to an age of
psychobabble and post-yuppyism, is 'feelgood.'
But what are feelgood movies? Short answer: The Wedding Banquet and
Sleepless In Seattle are. They present human problems and then they fix
them. They ask you to believe that people are fundamentally loving and warm.
They have happy endings. And they are the disposable-tissue industry's best
friend.
The worst feelgood movies can also make you feel cheated: your tears or
cheers wrung by a form of emotional arm-wrestling, using music, plot
contrivance, limpid-eyed stars and if possible a dog. But there are no dogs
in The Wedding Banquet and Sleepless In Seattle: two of the best romantic
comedies in recent memory. And there is enough sour wit and credible
cross-accident to make any last-reel handkerchief-reaching feel well earned.
The first movie won the Golden Bear at Berlin this year. The hero (Winston
Chao) is Taiwanese-American - just like the film - and lives prosperously in
New York. He devotes half his emotional energies to his native gay lover
(Mitchell Lichtenstein), the other half to parrying parental postcards from
Taipei urging marriage. When Pa and Ma turn up in person for a two-week
visit, the lovers stash away the gay calendars, masquerade as flat-sharers
and recruit a Taiwanese girl painter, who wants a 'green card' to stay in
America, for a let's-make-the-folks-happy wedding.
Writer-director Ang Lee scarcely sounds a false note. Things go right in the
story only after they have spent a proper amount of time going wrong. For
much of the movie, the hero's parent-deterring subterfuges backfire: as when
he fills in a computer marriage form they have sent and lists a
near-impossible blend of specifications in his bride - two doctorate
degrees, five languages, an opera singing career - only for a suitable
candidate to turn up on the next plane. She bursts into Madam Butterfly
right there at the East River cafe. Soon she has been put on the next plane
out.
Around the wedding itself, the comic set-pieces are scattered like confetti.
A registry ceremony with the foreign-born bride ever more bewildered in her
responses ('for better, for richer', 'till sickness and death . . .'); a gay
best man (Lichtenstein) making sure his friend's lips are wiped after each
kiss; and games of musical woks back home in the kitchen. Here the gay
lover, conscious of appearances, leaps away from the stove whenever the
parents pass through, pushing artist-bride plus wooden spoon into the steam.
The film's final accelerando of disaster - including pregnancy and parental
truth-learning - keeps the story piquant and perilous even as the (almost)
happy ending looms.
Sleepless In Seattle also spends furlongs of footage working to deserve its
feelgood factor. Here is a romance between a boy and girl who never meet.
Well, they might meet in the final minutes, but why should I spoil your fun
by specifying whether they do; whether Seattle widower Tom Hanks and
Baltimore pen-friend Meg Ryan actually fulfil their mooted Valentine's Day
tryst atop the Empire State Building? Only Hanks's small son (Ross Malinger)
has really tried to make it work. He first set the two hearts fluttering by
pushing lonely Dad into a radio agony phone-in where he bared his soul to a
listening world including, 3000 miles away in a car, the captivated Ryan.
Director and co-writer Nora Ephron manhandles David Twohy's original story
into a semblance of her own sweet-and-sour romance When Harry Met Sally.
This is more 'When Sam Did His Damnedest Not To Meet Annie.' Sundered by a
continent, each spends the film dithering with his or her respective dates
or mates: Hanks with a hyena-laughed former flame he has re-ignited, Ryan
with her stuffy fiance Walter (Bill Pullman). 'Walter: it's quite a formal
name, isn't it?' says her mother, planting the early anti-Walter time-bomb.
And yes, soon Ryan is hankering after Hanks: a fact we recognise from her
constant re-viewings of An Affair To Remember on TV, used by Ephron as a
flag-of-distress romantic leitmotif, and from her sobbings over Cary Grant
and Deborah Kerr as they stumble star-crossed towards the world's tallest
building.
Of course the Empire State is no longer the world's tallest building. But
who wants a romantic tryst atop the World Trade Centre? Besides, Sleepless
In Seattle is all about the absurdity of romantic destiny as a concept.
'What we think is fate,' someone cracks, 'is just two neuroses knowing
they're a perfect match.' This film would be sentimental if it were not
funny at sentimentality's expense. Witness the scene where a girl sobbingly
relates the climax to a favourite weepie to two men friends, who then parody
her with a sobbing account of the climax to The Dirty Dozen.
It ends, of course, with stars and sighs and 'destiny' fulfilled. But this,
like The Wedding Banquet, is a feelgood film that puts in enough early work
in the reality department to earn its right to feel good and to make us do
so.
The Fugitive has been a monster hit in America. There any film with Harrison
Ford jumping from crashed prison vans, sidestepping oncoming express trains,
leaping from the tops of dams and exposing corruption in high places carries
the label 'Critic-proof'. Actually, American critics lauded the film, which
shows that even an intelligent person can end up soft in the brain if hit
over the head often enough.
Dr Richard Kimble (Ford) is accused of having killed his wife. He is packed
off to Death Row but escapes from his prison escort. Then he doubles back to
Chicago in disguise to start proving his innocence. Then - oh but you have
all seen The Fugitive series on TV and if you have not you may get some
fresh enjoyment out of this high-octane twaddle.
Speaking personally, I felt that the engine kept missing. Too many
coincidences. Too many 'Oh there he is]' sightings in hospital corridors,
which fail unaccountably to end in capture. Nor was I happy with the idea of
a one-handed hit man, the real killer played by ghoulish Andreas Katsulas.
Surely murdering a doctor's fully conscious, struggling wife is difficult
enough with two hands? And then there is the danger - realised here - that
the framed doctor will know how to look up the said uni-limb in the medical
records.
Never mind. Insanity has its own momentum, Hollywood its own
ignore-the-rules driving licence. Andrew (Under Siege) Davis directs at 90
mph, as if trying to reach journey's end without a single comfort stop; and
Tommy Lee Jones, in swashbuckling form as the pursuing US Marshal, screeches
round even more corners on two wheels than Mr Ford.
Boiling Point and In The Soup have nought in common but their quasi-culinary
titles and their links with the Mafia. The first is a thriller that scarcely
reaches feeding-bottle temperature. Mafia-embroiled crook Dennis Hopper,
wearing glowing orange hair, is pursued through the night by black detective
Wesley Snipes, failing to glow at all either histrionically or optically.
Lesson for the week: putting a black actor in a film noir is as problematic
as putting a white actor in a snow movie. You had better make sure your
lighting cameraman knows his business.
In The Soup we have reviewed before, when it opened to three men and a dog
at the National Film Theatre. Now this funny film about film-making is in
the West End - with its mishap-prone hero (Steve Buscemi) finding that the
shortest route to movie finance is through an even more mishap-prone Mafia
boss (Seymour Cassel) - and you may all, if you please, attend.
