
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton's plan for high altitude air-drops of relief supplies
into Bosnia is intended to highlight not only his humanitarian concerns but
to demonstrate a new US willingness actively to engage in European security
problems.
At his press conference with Mr John Major, the British prime minister, on
Wednesday afternoon, he said he had been assured by General Colin Powell,
chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, that operations could be conducted at
minimal risk to US pilots.
He conceded that high altitude air-drops might not be optimally accurate,
but that it was planned 'to leaflet the area in advance' so that if any
loads fell outside the intended half-mile target area they could easily be
located.
Mr Major again endorsed Mr Clinton's proposals in US television interviews
yesterday morning and the administration thinks it is in the process of
lining up enough allied support to minimise objections to the initiative.
Ms Jennone Walker, of the White House national security council, said that
even if Russia could not assist in this particular operation it was
administration's general policy to offer Moscow 'a constructive role in
European security, including a military role'.
In an address to the European Institute here, Ms Walker contrasted the new
US engagement in European security issues with that of the Bush
administration, which, she said, saw the unravelling of the former
Yugoslavia in purely humanitarian terms and had down-played US strategic
interests.
'The Yugoslav tragedy,' she said, 'illustrates that military power still
matters in Europe'.
She added that beyond the airdrops, 'I think you will see us willing to use
force again on a case-by-case basis, but in a variety of combinations.' She
cited possible umbrellas for action as the UN, the Conference on Security
and Co-operation in Europe and Nato.
Mr Clinton had also stressed the continuing US commitment to find a
negotiated settlement in Bosnia, though neither he nor Mr Major specifically
endorsed the existing Vance-Owen plan dividing up the country into
semi-autonomous provinces. Mr Major said he had 'no view' on its merits and
Mr Clinton said it might be difficult to monitor and enforce from a
peacekeeping point of view.
