
AGRICULTURAL and primary products remain the mainstay of New Zealand's
export efforts, and with access problems remaining in many key markets, the
country is pinning its hopes on a satisfactory outcome of the GATT Uruguay
round.
From the mid-1980s the country energetically removed all forms of farming
tax incentives and farmer support systems, hoping to prove to the world that
New Zealand could be a model of efficiency and show what an
agriculturally-based economy could achieve in a liberalised trading
environment.
Profitability is gradually returning to the sector, after a difficult
transition period, when many farmers were forced to leave their properties
because of financial difficulties compounded by high interest and exchange
rates.
Today most farmers welcome the reforms, arguing through their representative
body, Federated Farmers, that they are succeeding through a combination of
hard work, efficient practices, and low inflation. Average farm profits
remain low, however, especially for wool and beef farmers.
New Zealand continues to run into trade barriers, such as the decision by
the US authorities to cut the quota for beef imports from 214,000 to 194,000
tonnes this year.
Access problems continue for lamb exports to the EC. Despite a quota of
200,000 tonnes, exporters believe strong demand could easily see New Zealand
supplying 250,000 tonnes this year.
In dairying, New Zealand is severely limited in the amount of cheese it can
supply Britain, and faces a quota for butter. The New Zealand authorities
attach great importance to further reform in the GATT round. This month,
Trade Negotiations Minister Philip Burdon warned against pressure to 'water
down' measures to liberalise world agricultural trade. He said any outcome
that reduced any of the proposals was unacceptable to New Zealand and other
members of the Cairns Group of agricultural exporting nations.
'We have already made concessions and must be very firm in resisting any
further reduction in the draft agreement,' he said.
Privately, New Zealand negotiators are confident of a satisfactory outcome.
However, no one expects it to solve all New Zealand's problems. For example,
the removal of the present US quota system for beef would open up that
market to imports from South American countries who are making strenuous
attempts to eliminate foot and mouth disease.
The New Zealand agricultural scene presents a complex picture: producers of
some commodities are achieving high profits, while others continue to
struggle. High lamb prices in Europe and elsewhere have proved a bonanza to
some farmers.
New Zealand has had an extended summer of warm temperatures and light rain
which has been perfect for lamb production. Farmers have been holding back
stock from meat companies to get the best price. In turn, this is leading to
difficulties for the companies to fill orders from the UK and elsewhere, and
they are being forced to pay exceptionally high prices for lambs at
livestock sales.
With a positive outlook for the next 18 months for sheepmeat prices, the
price of a lamb has doubled since last year from around NZDollars 25 to
NZDollars 50. However, the same farmer is receiving remarkably low prices
for fleece wool, due to the international recession. It is estimated that
real wool prices are at their lowest level since the 1930s.
In the US, the quota system has led to a big rise in prices for New Zealand
beef at market, which are an important ingredient in the hamburger trade.
Last year the US took 76 per cent of New Zealand's beef production. This
year it is taking 55 per cent. Supply problems in the US has led to the
equivalent of a NZ 70 cent rise in the American market price in the past six
months to around NZDollars 5.35 a kilogram.
However, this apparent bonanza benefitting New Zealand farmers, as the
export companies are being forced to sell the remaining 45 per cent at lower
prices elsewhere in the world, where they are running into competition from
US exports.
Exports of fruit also present a confusing pattern. The abundant supplies of
fruit of all types last year in the important European market, coupled with
the loss of the US market led to big headaches for kiwifruit producers.
Returns from kiwifruit tumbled from NZDollars 1bn to NZDollars 500m causing
serious problems for the newly formed Kiwifruit Marketing Board which has
ended up in financial difficulties.
The board is hoping that a smaller crop this year will eventually lead the
industry to recover. Last year apple exporters earned exceptionally good
money: most of their crop was sold in European and other markets before the
glut of European fruit depressed prices.
So far this season New Zealand apples are selling well in Europe, especially
the new varieties, but there is some concern at how more traditional
varieties - such as Granny Smiths - will sell, due to increased competition
from South Africa and other producers.
There is optimism that the agreement last month which saw the Japanese
government agree to import New Zealand apples, will lead to good returns for
orchardists over the next five years. This was a significant breakthrough:
New Zealand is now the only country apart from Korea allowed to sell apples
to Japan.
Last year New Zealand earned NZDollars 1.3bn from exporting fish, the first
time the total had passed the Dollars 1bn mark. While optimism remains high
that the industry will be earning Dollars 2bn a year by the end of the
decade, the Fishing Industry Board warned last month that earnings would
probably fall this year because of the depth of the northern hemisphere
recession which is depressing prices for some varieties.
In recent months, however, forestry has turned out to be a real bonanza for
farmers and others. Environmental problems in the US and Asia led to a
quadrupling of the prices of some timber. While prices have since fallen
back sharply, the price of a New Zealand radiata log is still fetching
NZDollars 425 a cubic metre compared with NZDollars 150 this time last year.
New Zealand is a world leader in farming timber. Thanks to its warm climate
with ample rain, trees flourish, and reach maturity in 20 to 25 years. With
forecasts of growing supply problems over the coming years, especially in
Asia, confidence is high that forestry will continue to pay handsome
dividends.
This is leading many farmers to transform large parts of their farms to
farming radiata pine trees - a process that is making a dramatic difference
in the New Zealand landscape.
