
The young woman in the wine bar was furious. Shoes were the problem. She
had, she told her friends, searched and searched and not a shoe shop in
London had anything for sale that she wanted to buy.
They were full of platforms; hideous, ugly, clumping, frightful, unsexy,
horrid platforms. Nothing nice, she reiterated, as she gazed fondly at her
well-polished spike-heeled courts, amid mutters of passionate agreement from
the friends. One began to fantasise about a lynch mob teetering into
London's stores to demand nice shoes. Lots of them.
Shoes can arouse strong passions. When the democratic masses liberated
Imelda Marcos's formidable wardrobe in the presidential palace in Manila,
they were deeply shocked by her 3,000 pairs of shoes.
For the Filipinos, and for the world, those shoes became the symbol of greed
and excess. But, as puritans, moralists and right-thinking people exclaimed
in disgust, some remained silent. Many women could understand Imelda. After
all, some knew that their own closets were crammed with shoes. Given
Imelda's ill-gotten resources, who is to say that they too would not have
managed to accumulate a similar number? Some women have a shoe thing. It is
not really a guilty secret. It is just that talking about it tends to cause
men a disproportionate amount of distress. But among themselves certain
women are open about their shoe habits.
'I'm a shoe fetishist,' says Elaine Paige, the singer. 'I have a real fetish
for shoes,' says TV personality Gloria Hunniford defiantly. 'I have a mega
fetish about shoes,' explains Ulrika Jonsson, a television presenter. 'I'm a
shoe fanatic,' is how designer Edina Ronay puts it. 'I'm a complete
shoeaholic,' jokes actress Kate Hardie.
'I've got about 25 pairs, not counting dancing shoes,' says Darcy Bussell,
the ballerina. 'I have about 50 pairs,' says actress Tara Fitzgerald. 'About
100 pairs,' guesses Gloria Estefan, singer.
'I own about 200 pairs,' says Belinda Carlisle, also a singer, without
hesitation. 'Let's just say,' says Charlene Tilton, a former star of Dallas,
'that I understand Imelda. I have a whole wardrobe full of high-heeled
shoes.'
Greta Garbo once bought 70 pairs in the same style (but several colours).
Marlene Dietrich, who had hers made to measure by Ferragamo, reckoned that,
since a pair were worn out after two outings, a replacement had to be
ordered immediately. Why, when women can be infinitely cautious and
restrained when buying clothes, are they so inconsistent where shoes are
concerned?
There are several practical explanations. Unless a shoe is made-to-measure,
it is unlikely to fit perfectly. Those of us whose feet do not chance to
match a manufacturer's last, are engaged on an endless quest for comfort.
Given a co-operative sales assistant, a woman can try every shoe in the shop
in the time it takes to wriggle into three clothes outfits in a cramped
changing room. And she does not have to address the fact that a dress size
10 no longer appears to accommodate her hips. One's shoe size remains
reassuringly constant.
Then there is the fashion imperative. Or, as the shoe designer, Manolo
Blahnik, puts it: 'A fine shoe is an essential part of fashionable dress. It
can provide an accent to an outfit - whether witty, solemn, provocative or
simply elegant. Dress designers know that the right shoes are a crucial
ingredient to a successful look.'
And the wrong shoes can wreck an outfit. As fashion changes its proportions,
every element of dress changes. The woman in the wine bar was wearing a
tight mini skirt and a jacket with square shoulders. She had decided to pass
on long skirts and the soft, slender outline of 1993, the look which demands
clumpy shoes and looks frumpy with spike-heeled court shoes. So she was
right about her needs.
Few of us are so impervious to fashion's swings. Most of us have clambered
aboard a pair of platforms. So, to a certain extent, women's shoe hoards
represent the detritus of their journeys along fashion's meandering highway.
Not so much a problem of rampant acquisition as one of never throwing away.
And yet there is more to it than that. When pressed, some women admit to
never wearing, indeed to never having worn even once, a high proportion of
their hoard. Pressed to show and tell, these women will tenderly unwrap
delicate, pointy-heeled confections of shiny leather, softest suede, satin,
grosgrain, leopardskin print, brocade or lace, all in deeply impractical
colours and adorned with bows, buckles, sequins, gilt or embroidery.
Women can use shoes to express (and then hastily banish to the back of the
cupboard) a fantasy self. This self is simultaneously ultra feminine,
fragile, refined and a total vamp.
Not that these shoes are the stuff that true shoe fetishists' (always male
and usually masochistic) dreams are made of. They do not have to be. For
reasons that psychiatrists, psychologists and fashion historians are all
unable to fathom, the female foot and its shoe are erotically charged.
When, in the 1970s, William A. Rossi had a stab at solving the problem in
his book, The Sex Life of the Foot and Shoe, he concluded that there were
several factors at work. The intrinsic sensitivity of the feet (toe-sucking
apart, has anyone tickled yours recently?) makes them an area of sensuality.
Then there's Sigmund Freud's argument that the foot is a phallic symbol.
There is also the way high heels affect the wearer's gait and posture,
emphasising the hips and buttocks, arching the back, thrusting the bosom
forward, lengthening the leg, tightening the calf muscle and focusing
attention on the ankle.
Fragile ankles and small feet are feminine and, in terms of dress, anything
which reinforces gender differences is sexy. Unfortunately, nowadays most
women have comparatively large feet and sturdy ankles.
Perhaps the endless quest for shoes is, in fact, the endless quest for
ideally feminine feet and ankles.
But there is a new element. The female executive's 1980s 'power' uniform was
incomplete without her high, high heels.
As she strode out, hips swinging, she felt in control, autonomous, truly
powerful. There is no rule that says you cannot invest an old accessory with
new symbolism and then feel undermined when the symbol is snatched away from
you.
Significantly, when the Michael Douglas character in The War of the Roses
decided to whip his uppity wife into line, he invaded her punctiliously
ordered closet and, leering horribly, sawed the heels off all her many
shoes.
