
The Bundesbank yesterday tight-ened its money supply growth targets for next
year, but stressed this was not a signal for a more restrictive interest
rates policy.
Mr Hans Tietmeyer, president, in a modestly upbeat review of economic and
monetary conditions, also suggested inflation was weakening and reinforced
economists' expectations that the recent series of small interest rate cuts
would be resumed early in the new year.
The bank's central council fixed the 1994 target range for annualised
expansion of the key M3 measure at 4-6 per cent, compared with 4.5-6.5 per
cent this year. As expected, it left the Bundesbank's key discount rate
unchanged at 5.75 per cent.
A surprise surge in monetary growth in November, announced yesterday,
demonstrated that the bank still has grounds for concern. M3, its most
trusted indicator of future inflation, grew at an annualised rate of 7.2 per
cent, up from 6.9 per cent in October.
Mr Tietmeyer said that although the economy was in a difficult transition
phase, and the correction of structural problems in the west needed time,
inflation was weakening and the east no longer relied solely on cash
transfers from the west.
He said the bank would assess any scope for rate reductions. The discount
rate has been cut six times this year, paring it from 8.25 per cent in
January to 5.75 per cent now.
Mr Otmar Issing, the bank's top economist, suggested west German inflation
could fall below 3 per cent in the course of the new year, compared with the
latest figure of 3.6 per cent.
The average rate of price increases for 1994 would still be above 3 per
cent, he warned, and there was always a danger to import prices from the
possible appreciation of the US dollar or higher costs of oil.
Yesterday's decisions, although criticised by trade unions and opposition
politicians as brakes on the economic recovery, were widely welcomed by
industry and the financial community.
The tighter M3 target range underscored the bank's determination to maintain
monetary stability, according to the Confederation of German industry. It
allowed room for further interest cuts and ensured enough liquidity for
tension-free economic growth, the confederation added.
Mr Tietmeyer said one main factor persuading the bank to lower its targets
was reduced potential for economic growth. The 1993 range allowed for growth
of up to 3 per cent, while the new figures assumed 2.5 per cent next year.
Falling capital investment and decisions by some manufacturers to base new
plant outside Germany had reduced potential.
The notional inflation rate allowed for was unchanged at 2 per cent.
Government bonds, Page 29
Currency markets, Page 31
