
FIRST-TIME property buyers and foreign investment are fuelling hopes of
recovery at London's Docklands.
Mr Rick Folkes, a senior negotiator with Chestertons Residential, which
sells throughout Docklands, said that sales had trebled year on year. 'In
February 1992 we sold just six homes but last month we moved 18 properties.
And that trend looks set to continue,' he said.
In 1989 the collapse of Kentish Property, a Docklands developer, marked the
beginning of a property crash which spread nationwide, claiming hundreds of
property and building companies. Now the signs suggest Docklands is ready to
join any national property revival.
Mr Iain Bell, an estate agent at Knight Frank and Rutley's Dockland office,
is meeting a smarter investor at his east London office: 'It's taken several
years for properties to reach realistic levels. The public have learned a
lot of hard lessons.
'Year on year sales are up 100 per cent, albeit from a low base, but very
few will spend over Pounds 200,000.'
Moreover, with sales concentrated at the lower end of the market - all but
four of Chestertons' February sales cost less than Pounds 85,000 - Docklands
has quietly shed the yuppie label that dogged the development in the mid to
late 1980s. The champagne lifestyle has been replaced by gritty realism.
'Our new customers are far more streetwise,' says Mr Bell. 'There's a new
criteria for buying property: can I afford my home if it's over-mortgaged or
if I lose my job? The days of taking a mortgage four times your salary are
over.'
Since the collapse of Olympia & York, the Canary Wharf developer, in May
last year the property slump in Docklands has been compounded by uncertainty
about the Jubilee line extension. But there is renewed optimism among buyers
and sellers as the Pounds 1.7bn rail project is expected to be allowed to
proceed in the next few weeks and the Limehouse road tunnel is near
completion.
A nervous market is keeping prices low, however. An apartment at Clippers
Quay originally valued at Pounds 195,000 recently sold for Pounds 120,000.
Mr Daniel Latimer, a Hampstead retailer, spent a frustrating Easter bank
holiday scouring Docklands' bargains. He said: 'The Canary Wharf debacle did
untold damage to this area but the potential for price growth here is
enormous. In established markets like Hampstead prices just go hand-in-glove
with inflation. It's ironic most dealers here have chosen to close for the
bank holiday.'
With this cheap home market and sterling's devaluation Docklands is also
proving an attraction for foreign buyers. At the Anchorage Point Courtyard
development 43 flats were sold last month to the Bank of China. Similar
deals have been struck with Texaco, the oil company, and Morgan Stanley, the
investment bank.
Mr Tim Whitmey, associate director of Savills estate agents, which secured
the Chinese investment, is convinced foreign buyers are committed to the
long-term future of Docklands: 'There is increasing activity among
businesses moving into the Docklands. This is not simply a speculative
exercise, they are looking for cheap accommodation for their Docklands
staff.'
Hopes for the long-term recovery of property prices in Docklands will depend
on a continuing fall in the number of home repossessions and of homeowners
trapped by negative equity, and accelerating foreign investment.
'There is a shortage of quality homes coming on to the market,' Mr Bell
said. 'So I'm optimistic that if queries transfer into deals, prices will
rise. The scales will tip.'
