
NEW ZEALAND apple growers are licking their lips at the prospect of becoming
the only foreign suppliers, apart from the Koreans, to bite into the
lucrative Japanese market.
Mr Jim Bolger, the prime minister, announced in Tokyo this last week that he
had been told by Japanese prime minister Mr Kiichi Miyazawa to expect the
ban to be lifted within a few weeks.
New Zealand has been pressing the Japanese to open their market for New
Zealand fruit for 20 years, and over the past year considerable progress has
been made on a protocol to cover trade in apples between the two countries.
Japanese growers have been battling against New Zealand access.
Many other countries, including the US and Australia have been pressing
Japan to relax its ban, but it is believed that New Zealand, having signed
the complex protocols agreed by both countries, has a considerable time
advantage over its rivals.
Under the agreement New Zealand will also import Japanese apples. The first
are not expected to be sent till early next year, but it is expected the
trade could reach 10,000 tonnes in five years.
Hitherto the Japanese have resisted imports of all apples, apart from Korea,
because of the perceived risk that the apples will carry the codlin moth
pest. Under the proposed joint venture scientists from both countries have
been working on testing procedures.
Brian Aitken, group general manager fresh fruit exports for the Apple and
Pear Board said that the agreement was a real breathrough into a market that
had been closed for many years. However he said he expected the trade would
initially be small, worth possibly NZDollars 5m in the first year.
He said that under the agreed protocol New Zealand would have to meet
stringent standards. Orchards sending fruit to Japan would have to be
isolated by a 500 metre 'zone', there would be strict fumigation
requirements and cool stores and packing plants would be strictly
controlled. 'We also have a lot to learn about the Japanese market.'
Mr Aitken said he expected other countries, including the USt and Australia
would now put pressure on the Japanese to open their market to them as well.
'However having pioneered this protocol, we won't be rushing to let our
rivals know all the details,' he said.
Mr Aitken said that New Zealand had just made another breakthrough by
signing a deal to supply 15,000 cases of apples to China. A similar deal had
also been signed with Mexico, another new market.
