
NORTH KOREA said yesterday it would boycott a key meeting today with South
Korea, setting back hopes for a resolution of its dispute over nuclear
inspections.
North Korea's cancellation of the talks came as senior US and South Korean
defence officials met in Seoul to consider whether to suspend their joint
Team Spirit military exercise scheduled for next spring.
Pyongyang has demanded that Team Spirit be cancelled before allowing the
resumption of routine nuclear inspections by the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA).
But the US is unlikely to cancel Team Spirit as long as North Korea fails to
achieve progress in talks with South Korea about additional mutual nuclear
inspections.
US and South Korean officials had hoped that today's inter-Korean meeting
would break an impasse, with the two countries agreeing to exchange
presidential envoys who would discuss nuclear inspections and other
bilateral issues.
US and South Korean officials believe that the North Korean nuclear
inspection issue may now be reaching a critical stage.
Mr Hans Blix, the IAEA director-general, told the UN earlier this week that
agency's ability to monitor activity at North Korea's nuclear facilities is
in danger of being broken if Pyongyang continues to deny access to IAEA
inspectors.
Mr Les Aspin, the US defence secretary, and Mr Han Sung-joo, the South
Korean foreign minister, agreed yesterday in Seoul that whenever the IAEA
declares the safeguards to be broken, they would stop negotiating with North
Korea and ask the UN Security Council to impose economic sanctions on
Pyongyang.
'The most important variable right now is Blix's judgment on when the
safeguards are broken. Seoul and Washington believe this judgment is
entirely up to the IAEA,' said a South Korean foreign ministry official.
North Korea has warned that it would take 'appropriate counter-measures' if
it is threatened with sanctions, implying a military response.
Pyongyang's refusal to meet Seoul appears to be in reaction to the UN
General Assembly's overwhelming approval of a resolution on Monday urging
North Korea to co-operate immediately with IAEA inspections.
