
ONLY one thing stands between the average person and their computer: a
keyboard. Although most people feel happiest communicating with each other
through speech, voice interfaces for computers are viewed as a technology
very much for the future.
The computer industry has grappled with this dilemma for at least 20 years.
Periodically, computers which are designed to be controlled with digitised
voice commands are designed and sold to a small number of users. And the
most successful use of voice in computing to date has been found in
specially-built military systems, where voice is used to control aircraft
and radar equipment, and in speech synthesis systems for the disabled.
In business, voice technology is already being widely used for
telephone-based services such as voice messaging. Retailers can replace
human telephone operators with a voice messaging system, then accept orders
placed from customers who key in relevant numbers on tone dialling
telephones. Hospitals and other commercial organisations are using internal
telephone exchanges to manage this type of voice messaging application. Text
files, such as railway timetables and stock market reports, can be digitised
and broadcast over telephone and computer networks.
Small businesses and private homes also benefit from new digital exchanges
and voice/data networks now being installed by British Telecom across the
UK. The fact that most exchanges can store digitised voice locally on
computer disks means that BT can try out new services such as Call Minder.
This tells incoming callers if the number they want is busy, then invites
them to leave a voice message.
Other applications for voice in business have always been limited by the
cost of computer hardware. Storing digitised voice is a resource-hungry
business, with one minute of uncompressed speech taking up one megabit of
disk storage.
Another problem is processing speed. If a computer is to recognise the words
being spoken to it, it must have some way of checking spoken words against a
known vocabulary. Such a vocabulary swallows up disk space, and the act of
matching word to voice dictionary requires a fast computer processor.
But the fact that the cost of PC and Unix hardware has fallen so
dramatically over the past year or two is bringing new voice related
applications onto the desktop. An example of this new breed of
voice-activated application is Shakespeare Speechwriter, a word processor
and document handler that can be controlled wholly or partially through
voice commands.
Speechwriter allows users to dictate documents to their PC, which then
displays words on-screen almost as quickly as they are spoken. Software
converts spoken words into digitised data, which can be stored on the PC's
hard disk. Shakespeare expects that key users of the new system will be
middle and senior managers, who can create documents without using the
keyboard, and sales order processing departments which normally type or
write down incoming telephone enquiries.
Shakespeare will sell Speechwriter as an all-in-one 'voice processor,' which
will include a beefed-up Compaq 80486 PC and software, for around Pounds
5,000.
Although there will be more applications of this type on offer in the
future, most software for the PC that uses voice is still fairly limited.
The most it can normally do is to accept voice commands to open or close
windows on the screen, or to record and play short voice annotations.
Software packages written for Apple's System 7 operating system or for
Microsoft Windows 3.1, which now includes voice capabilities, let users with
a suitably equipped PC record short messages. The message can be included
within a word processing or electronic mail document, where it is shown as a
special icon.
When the document is read by somebody else, they can click on the sound icon
and hear the message. This kind of voice annotation is particularly useful
when users want to be more expressive in the message they are sending, or
wish to draw attention to a particular part of the document.
The fact that Microsoft has included support for voice in Windows means that
there will soon be a critical mass of users able to make the most of voice
in everyday business applications. Another factor will be the increasing
trend for PC and workstation hardware manufacturers to build voice
capability into their products.
JUST THE BEGINNING
One of these manufacturers is Compaq, which recently said that it would
include 'business audio' as a standard feature in its middle and top end
Deskpro products. Deskpro PCs now include a sound chip and a microphone,
allowing users to both record and play back digitised voice. But as Compaq's
desktop product manager, Sue Forkin, explains, this is just the beginning
for multimedia in PCs. The way in which voice is used so far in computing is
still fairly rudimentary and artificial. In the future, voice will be much
more useful - particularly in security systems.
Along with multimedia, security is one of today's hot topics in voice
technology. The fact is that a voice print is as individual to one person as
a fingerprint. It means that voice will be extremely useful in the control
of everyday items, such as automated teller machines (ATMs), as well as
office systems like fax machines. Instead of using complex commands and
remote controls, customers will control such systems simply by talking to
them.
But the key benefits of voice interfaces of the future will be freedom for
users, who will be able to operate computers 'hands-free'; and the removal
of the keyboard barrier for IT-shy managers. Bearing in mind the fact that
people type at rates from a slow 25 words per minute (wpm), but speak at
around 200 wpm, speech input can also bring productivity benefits all round.
'The fact is that the keyboard has been a limiting feature in computing for
far too long,' concludes Mike Patrick, of Digital Equipment UK. 'Voice
interfaces have a great deal of potential, because voice is the key method
of communication for most people.'
