
SHARES of Microsoft, the world's largest computer software company, dropped
sharply yesterday as analysts cut their estimates for fiscal 1994 earnings.
Microsoft was trading at Dollars 73 1/4 , down Dollars 5 3/4 from Thursday's
close, at midday.
The fall followed a meeting with analysts at the company's Redmond,
Washington, headquarters where Microsoft warned of slower growth in
revenues.
'We are planning for growth, but we do not expect to maintain the 36 per
cent revenue growth rate we achieved in fiscal 1993,' said Mr Mike Brown,
treasurer. First-quarter revenues may be lower than the Dollars 1bn recorded
for the fourth quarter of fiscal 1993, he added.
Microsoft, which is under investigation by the US Federal Trade Commission
for alleged anti-trust violations, stressed the competitive pressures it
faced in several segments of the software market.
However, the company also boasted it had overtaken competitors in the
markets for spreadsheets and word processors used with the Windows operating
system.
Over the past five years, Microsoft's revenues have grown at an average
annual rate of 46 per cent. However, Microsoft executives highlighted
several market trends that may dampen the company's growth rate this year.
Mr Steve Ballmer, executive vice-president, said much of the growth of
Microsoft's sales had been driven by a transition by PC users to Windows,
from MS-DOS, an older PC operating system program. With 30m copies of
Windows already in use, and sales running at 1.5m copies per month, the
transition period would be completed soon, he said.
Mr Ballmer suggested Microsoft's future growth rate would more closely
reflect growth in the PC market, which analysts said may be in the range of
about 20 per cent per year. He said the company expected more than half of
1994 revenues to come from products introduced during the year, warning that
earnings were becoming increasingly linked to new product cycles.
Pricing pressures, particularly in Europe, could also slow revenue growth,
Mr Ballmer warned. He said Microsoft's competitors were 'being increasingly
aggressive in pricing'. Although PC software companies seldom drop the list
prices for products, the effective selling price is often reduced by
so-called 'competitive upgrades', discounts offered to users of a rival
products.
The price pressure is 'most extreme' in Europe, he said. Lotus Development
in particular was offering products at 'close-to-cost' prices. Microsoft was
'not willing to lose market share. That will guide our pricing actions,' Mr
Ballmer said .
PC manufacturers are increasingly bundling Microsoft Windows and other
software programs with their products, Mr Ballmer noted. This could also
have a dampening effect on revenue growth, although such sales are more
profitable for the software company, he said.
The US Justice Department is to review documents from the US Federal Trade
Commission's anti-trust investigation of Microsoft, according to a report in
the Chicago Tribune. The review signals the department may take up the case,
following two deadlocked votes by the FTC on whether to file a complaint
against Microsoft.
