
Correction (published 26th June 1993) appended to this article.
THE BEN LINE 1825-1982: AN ANECDOTAL HISTORY by Michael Strachan Michael
Russell Pounds 17.95, 248 pages
THE Ben Line will have first swum into some people's consciousness from
books about the Battle of Atlantic in which Ben Line ships were frequently
sunk by German U-boats. They may have asked: what was the Ben Line, and why
did it have that strange name?
The answer is that the Ben Line was a medium-sized Scottish shipping line,
based in Edinburgh, and it named its ships after Scottish mountains, such as
Benlomond. The past tense is deliberate: last year Ben Line sold its last
three container ships and mothballed its drilling ships. It is now largely a
shipping agency business.
This book is mainly about the post-war heyday of the Ben Line. Michael
Strachan, who devoted his career to the line and became its chairman and
chief executive, compresses the period from 1825 to 1945 into 19 pages, and
lays down his pen at 1982 when he retired. As he says, he has not written
the 'business history' a dispassionate economist might have produced. There
are few figures, sparse mention of profit and loss, and little second
guessing.
What he has written is a fine, detailed description of a how the Ben Line
worked both at sea and on land in the days when ships had their bridge
located satisfyingly halfway between bow and stern, and when British trade
was carried in British-owned ships built in British shipyards. The story is
enriched by countless anecdotes that only an insider could provide, as well
as photographs, and a good index. It sounds great fun.
Ben Line sailed mainly to the Far East. It was owned by the Thomson family
who had founded it: the key members for much of Strachan's time were Edward
(Mr Ted) and Sir Douglas. It maintained a Scottish aloofness from the grand
London-based shipping lines: when Sir Donald Anderson, chairman of P & O,
paid a visit to the company in the early 1960s and lunched in 'our poky
dining room' it was unprecedented.
After years of conservatism, Ben Line accepted the case for container ships
and in 1970 formed Ben Line Containers, with Ellerman Lines taking 20 per
cent. Three vessels were built in Germany and were very successful. As this
book finishes, Ben Line had survived the mergers and alliances of the
shipping industry with its independence and identity intact. Unfortunately,
that act became impossible to sustain. It would be nice to know more.
CORRECTION
In Tuesday's FT Review of Business Books, in the story headlined Salty
Scottish tales on Page X, the correct title of Michael Strachan's history of
the Ben Line shipping group is The Ben Line 1825-1982: An Anecdotal History,
published by Michael Russell, Pounds 17.95, 248 pages.
