
TOLLS ON Britain's motorways and trunk roads could cost road users Pounds
2bn a year, Mr John Prescott, shadow transport secretary, said yesterday.
Commenting on government proposals to hive off responsibility for the roads
to a body called Highways Command as a prelude to privatisation, Mr Prescott
denounced the tolls as a revenue-raising exercise.
His views were echoed by motorist and freight groups, who insisted that,
although they would welcome the creation of a co-ordinating body for roads,
privatisation must be matched with new guarantees on road investment.
The AA said: 'Motorists are already paying too much road tax,' Adding to
criticism that the government was failing to provide any clear strategy on
roads, the AA added: 'If this toll is just for extra tax, then we are dead
against it.'
Freight companies warned that British industry and commerce might also be
hard hit by road charges,
Mr Bryan Colley, director general of the Road Haulage Association, said: 'If
they are going to introduce road charges then these are going to be passed
on to manufac-turers and consumers.'
He added that profits were already 'paper thin'.
Fears were have also been expressed that tolls on motorways would force
traffic on to minor roads.
Mr Alan Jones, the managing director of TNT, which has 3,000 trucks each
travel-ing 100,000 miles of British roads every year, said: 'I can't see why
anyone would want to put tolls on motorways when these roads are designed to
take people out of cities. It will just encourage people to go into towns.'
Mr Colley suggested that, with road taxes for British freight vehicles
already considerably higher than in Europe, new road tolls could weaken the
competitiveness of British industry.
Road tax on a 38-tonne British truck is Pounds 3,100 a year, against Pounds
638 in France and Pounds 264 in Spain.
Mr John Guttridge, head of external affairs of the Freight Transport
Association, agreed: 'Britain is already in a geographically peripheral
position compared to Europe. This would make it harder to compete.'
Environmental groups have argued that road tolls would encourage use of
railways. But road user groups point out that, since most freight trips are
less than 50 miles, railways are too inflexible.
For whom the road tolls, Page 8
