
MR CLIVE Smith was 25 years old when he made his first million pounds. He
had started with one truck, built up a transport company and sold it to
Unilever.
Mr Smith had expanded the business by trucking subsidised meat from the
Irish Republic to Turkey. He claims that, by the time he sold it, Comarte
Europa International, was the biggest international refrigerated transport
company in the European common market.
That sale was in 1974, paving the way for Mr Smith, a self-made man with a
flair for deal-making, to move on to promote the Stock Exchange flotation of
several natural resources companies in the 1980s.
At the moment his career has hit a sticky patch. The share prices of many of
the companies in which he has substantial shareholdings have collapsed. The
Serious Fraud Office is investigating possible irregular share dealings in
two of them - Butte Mining and Richmond Oil & Gas - and he is negotiating
with his cred-itors.
He had a three-year contract with Unilever to continue managing Comarte but
his style did not match that of a big corporation and the contract was ended
by mutual agreement after 12 months.
He subsequently owned and managed companies in industrial property, plant
hire, industrial chemicals and car hire and leasing. He once told a
colleague that he became fascinated by commodity trading. Then one day which
is for ever etched in his memory, he made a Pounds 100,000 profit in the
morning but lost Pounds 250,000 in the afternoon. 'I realised commodity
trading could become addictive so I quit,' he said.
Mr Smith had his first taste of what the natural resources sector had to
offer in September 1977 when he acquired Parkland Colliery, a private coal
mine needing modernisation. It was a wonderful deal. Parkland had cash in
its books but he bought the company on deferred terms. He had already
established, drawing on his transport and plant hire experience, that
Parkland owned a great deal of good, saleable mechanical equipment and
plant. Asset sales covered the whole of the purchase price.
Colleagues say the simplicity of the Parkland deal made an indelible
impression on Mr Smith. 'He always looks for deals where there is no
downside for him,' said one.
In 1978 he acquired Podmore Hall Colliery Company which had a license to
mine substantial coal reserves. By 1981 Podmore had become the biggest
privately owned coal mine in the UK. That year both coal companies, which
had been bought for a total of Pounds 250,000, were sold to Anglo
International Mining for Pounds 1.875m.
Mr Smith said at the time that he sold out of coal because he felt that
investment in the production and development of oil and gas would show a
greater return on his capital. So he invested some of the proceeds in the US
oil and gas industry. In September 1981, with some partners, he set up a
chemical trading company to supply the oil and gas industry. Through the
contacts this brought, Mr Smith was introduced to some oil and gas prospects
and in October 1982 his company acquired its first interest in this sector.
In 1983 the company changed its name to Petranol and in February the
following year it was launched on the London Stock Exchange. Some 2.8m
shares, or 27 per cent of the equity, were offered for sale at 125p a share,
valuing Petranol at Pounds 13m. Mr Smith controlled 3.8m shares or 36.5 per
cent, worth, at the launch, Pounds 4.75m.
The Petranol launch forced Mr Smith into the public eye for one of the very
few times in his career. It was a time when Dallas was among the most
popular television shows so for a while newspapers were calling him 'the JR
of the Potteries'.
In fact, his home is between Nantwich and Crewe and some of his
acquaintances call him, unkindly, because he lost a thumb in a car accident,
'the nine-fingered, fat man from Cheshire.' This is not entirely fair
because, although a little portly, Mr Smith is not fat. One acquaintance
says: 'It is just that he looks as if he lives on chip butties.'
He has a benevolent but forceful north country manner and can be very
charming. But he can also be volatile if he is crossed. 'He likes to bark at
people and uses lawyers letters and writs a lot,' said one business
colleague. Another said: 'He is a guy who is easy to fall out with. He can
be very charming but he can be abrasive too.'
Like many north country businessmen, often with good reason, Mr Smith is
very distrustful of the City and its establishment.
This distrust intensified after the Petranol board in March 1986 voted him
out of the chairmanship. He subsequently left the board but was back in the
limelight again only weeks later when Petranol received an all-paper bid
worth Pounds 21m from another small oil and gas company, Inoco.
The Takeover Panel intervened and took the unusual step of ruling that Inoco
and Mr Smith had been acting in concert. It said Inoco should add a cash
alternative to its offer. Inoco did not have the financial resources for
this so it had to drop the bid. At that time it was said Inoco owned 6.6 per
cent of Petranol and Mr Smith 25 per cent. They undertook to reduce their
combined holdings to below the 29.9 per cent which automatically triggered a
bid.
Mr Smith seems to prefer to keep in the background, often not even taking a
non-executive directorship in those companies he has helped bring to market
or in which his family trusts have big shareholdings.
Consequently he uses a large number of people to do his bidding. One person
who has had business dealings with Mr Smith says: 'He has more accountants
and advisers than anyone I have ever known. He also has used up more lawyers
than anyone I have ever known.'
Mr Smith recently described himself as 'an independent businessman who acts
internationally as an adviser and consultant in the sale and purchase of
companies, generally with oil, gas or mineral assets in the US.'
Virtually all of his interests are held in offshore trusts. 'My entire
affairs are dealt with offshore by different administrators,' he said
recently. He has told acquaintances that this is because he does not trust
the City of London and its representatives.
In spite of this dislike, Mr Smith took a substantial shareholding in
Corporate Broking Services, set up by Mr David Wilkinson after he left TC
Coombes, another stockbroker. Mr Smith had several dealings with Coombes
which in the mid-1980s was one of the most aggressive broking houses in the
natural resources sector. Coombes went into receivership and CBS went into
liquidation in 1991.
These brokers were involved with Mr Smith in the Stock Exchange flotations
of Butte Mining, Richmond Oil & Gas and Globe Petroleum (launched first as
Far East Resources). Mr Smith also took a substantial shareholding in
another resource company, Geevor, which started as a Cornish tin miner.
Acquaintances speak in awe of Mr Smith's capacity for hard work. He
frequently commutes on the 7am train from Crewe to London and does not
return until 11 at night. 'You can often find him in his office at
midnight,' said one.
In his more mellow moods, Mr Smith frequently tells people that he is not
interested in money for himself but is working to secure the future of his
two daughters.
However, some acquaintances suggest that, like many entrepreneurs today, he
is not as rich as he once was and that many of his assets are pledged to the
banks as collateral for loans.
