
Beyond doubt, the revelation of Sunday's London Philharmonic concert with
Mariss Jansons - its principal guest conductor, new this season - was a
Shostakovich song-cycle, one of his last and bitterest works. He composed
the Six Poems of Marina Tsvetayeva, op. 143a, in 1973 for contralto and
piano; the next year he orchestrated them, strangely and sparsely, and in
1975 he died. Until Sunday I had never heard them in the concert-hall. One
would be lucky to hear them delivered with more searching eloquence than
they were here, by the Dutch mezzo Jard van Nes.
Tsvetayeva had been forced into exile from Russia for much of her life. She
returned there with her family in the late 1930s, but soon lost her husband
and daughter to state repression, and killed herself. Of the poems
Shostakovich chose for his song-cycle, he set the first as a defiant hymn to
the durability of poetry and the last - a rapturous eulogy of her friend and
fellow-poet Anna Akhmatova - as a grand expansion of the same message.
In between come an erotic idyll dedicated to Osip Mandelstam, Tsvetayeva's
onetime lover; a 'Hamlet'-study in stricken conscience - always an anxious
concern of this composer; and a pair of sour elegies on the death of Pushkin
and the belated, hypocritical honours granted to him by Tsar Nicholas I.
Just as Schoenberg's Ode to Napoleon used Byron's satirical diatribe to
excoriate Hitler, so Shostakovich made the philistine Tsar a dummy for the
monstrous Stalin, and the unlucky Pushkin a stand-in for Tsvetayeva herself.
Miss van Nes was superlatively forceful with all that. Never strident, but
humanely angry, and still proud. Though I cannot vouch for how a native
speaker might react to her Russian diction, she wielded it here to scathing
musico-dramatic purpose. In perfect sympathy Jansons called up as required
his divisi strings, his minatory pair of horns, the irruptions of xylophone,
chimes and celesta - always well balanced and well paced, always to
penetrating effect.
Earlier, the LPO strings on their own were svelte and acutely appreciative
in Schoenberg's plushy expansion of his Verklarte Nacht sextet. To my ears,
which recently heard the Arditti Quartet and friends sear their way through
the original chamber version, the collective arrangement never sounds so
febrile and poignant. Still, Jansons found a rich scale of gradations for
the riper string-writing, and faultless control. As for Strauss's Also
sprach Zarathustra, he drew finely modelled playing from the LPO, vivid but
not garish.
