
THE WORLD'S two leading nutmeg producers, Grenada and Indonesia, are trying
to find common ground on which they can control supply and strengthen the
world market for the spice.
Recent efforts to lift prices have included destroying stocks.
The latest move is being pushed by Grenada, which produces about a quarter
of world output, and whose economy is more heavily reliant on nutmeg than
Indonesia's, which accounts for virtually all the other 75 per cent.
The destruction of several hundred tonnes of stock by the countries followed
a progressive price decline since their cartel, created in 1989, collapsed.
'We have been speaking with the Indonesians about the state of the market,'
says Mr Nicholas Brathwaite, the prime minister of Grenada.
'I do not think that we will get another formal pact, but we are hoping that
we will be able to reach an agreement whereby we will be able to do
something about the supplies to the market,' he says.
Indonesian industry officials confirm that delegations have been visiting
Grenada for discussions on how best the producers can co-operate to improve
prices. They say, however, that the Indonesian industry will not again be
party to a cartel that attempts to set prices.
'We have explained this to our Grenadian counterparts, and they have told us
that they also are not interested in resurrecting the earlier agreement,'
says one official. 'What we are doing now is discussing how we can
co-operate in the international marketing of the product in the interest of
both countries.'
Neither Grenada nor Indonesia are willing to say specifically how the new
arrangement will work, and the extent of any likely cuts in nutmeg supplies.
It appears, however, that if they do reach an agreement, they will aim at
supplying the market with 9,500 tonnes a year, 500 tonnes less than current
world demand and 2,500 tonnes less than the current combined production of
both countries.
The cartel collapsed following extensive deregulation of the Indonesian
economy. Before it was established, the world price for nutmeg was about
Dollars 1,000 a tonne.
When the cartel became operative the Indonesian producers undertook to sell
their high quality nutmeg between Dollars 6,800 and Dollars 7,000 a tonne,
while low quality supplies were to be sold between Dollars 1,000 and Dollars
1,200 a tonne.
The Grenadians had committed themselves to a minimum price of Dollars 6,650
a tonne for their best nutmeg, with a minimum price for poorer quality
nutmeg was Dollars 5,575 a tonne.
Prices have since fallen as low as Dollars 550 a tonne and have generally
been below Dollars 1,000 a tonne.
The price collapse has been particularly painful to Grenada for which nutmeg
is the main commodity export. Grenada's earnings from nutmeg exports fell
from Dollars 18.1m in 1989 to Dollars 4.5m last year.
'In 1989 our farmers received ECDollars 12m (USDollars 4.5m) in bonus
payments because of the prices which we obtained then,' says Mr Brathwaite.
'Last year there was no bonus for the farmers because the price has fallen.
So we are in a very difficult situation.'
It remains to be seen whether the new targets for market supplies will
include the 3,500 tonnes that Grenada has agreed to ship to JHB, a Belgian
company, over five years, mainly for sale to China.
Any new agreement with Indonesia will 'complement' the marketing agreement
with JHB, Grenadian officials say.
The contract will also allow an increase in supplies of the Grenadian spice
to the US market, in which Indonesia is dominant.
JHB is to brand the product and will take more than the contracted 3,500
tonnes if the Chinese market performs well.
The eastern Caribbean island's dependence on foreign earnings from the spice
lies behind its need for higher prices. The Indonesians are more able to
tolerate lower world prices because their production costs are lower than
Grenada's.
Traditionally the market has been willing to pay more for the Grenadian
product because the quality was higher. But in seeking the co-operation of
the Indonesians, this is not a factor that Mr Brathwaite considers
important.
'The purchasers of nutmeg do not usually note that the Grenadian product is
of a higher quality,' the prime minister says. 'The quality does not
determine the price on the world market.'
