
THE GOVERNMENT yesterday attempted to defuse the growing political
controversy over leaked plans to raise some rail fares within London by 16
per cent.
An FT analysis, meanwhile, shows that fares on Network SouthEast - as well
as London Underground and London's buses - have risen consistently ahead of
inflation since 1984, when the Greater London Council, led by Mr Ken
Livingstone, cut prices.
Since then, while the retail price index rose by 55.3 per cent, bus fares
have risen by 92.3 per cent and tube fares by 94.5 per cent. Network
SouthEast registered an 81.7 per cent rise.
Since 1979, the distance which can be travelled on any London public
transport system for a set fare has been cut by 20 per cent.
Lord Caithness, a transport minister, sought yesterday to play down the
prospect of steep fare increases on Network SouthEast rail services, and
emphasised that suggestions that some fares could rise by 16 per cent were
hypothetical.
'It is quite natural that British Rail should look at various options, and
you are bound to throw up a range of alternatives. Then what happens - and
it is the process that is happening now - is that it is discussed between BR
and ministers,' he told BBC radio.
The scale of the possible increases has alarmed Tory MPs in the south-east.
Sir Keith Speed, a leading Tory rebel over rail privatisation, was certain
neither BR nor Mr John MacGregor, the transport secretary, would agree to
the sort of rises envisaged in the leaked papers.
Local elections in London next May are adding to the political sensitivity
of decisions on fares, as the 'preferred option' in the leaked document
would see the steepest increases for Travelcards, used in the greater London
area.
One of the Tory rebels over rail privatisation, Mr Andrew Bowden, the MP for
Brighton Kemptown, warned that the government must get the right balance
between fare rises and subsidy. He agreed there should be a 'reasonable'
increase, but insisted it should not be 16 per cent.
See Lex
Fare fears, Page 6
