
BARCLAYS will today launch a new private banking service in Britain. The
move is the latest effort by one of the high street banks to raise levels of
income from less risky forms of business than personal or business lending.
The bank, which has previously carried out some private banking for British
residents through its international private bank, has established new
British business at the headquarters of Barclays Private Banking in London.
The move coincides with reorganisation of international and UK domestic
private banking services into a separate business within Barclays. The
business has 16 offices around the world, and handles Pounds 10bn of
clients' assets.
Ms Heather Maizels, director of UK private banking, said the bank would aim
to provide services to clients with at least Pounds 500,000 in assets, but
would seek to be more flexible in selecting clients than some other private
banks.
Barclays has integrated BZW Portfolio Management, the private banking arm of
its investment bank, into the new Barclays Private Banking business.
Mr Michael Tomalin, managing director of Barclays Private Banking, said that
clients wanted 'discretion and efficiency' from a private bank. Barclays was
in a position to offer a wide range of services because of its size.
Barclays is among British banks which have been searching for ways of
increasing operating income without heavy capital demands. Private banking
is attractive because most lending is well-secured, and income is generated
through services.
Shareholders of Barclays are being asked to vote for the bank to call an
extraordinary general meeting to discuss an 'agenda for recovery'.
The call was made yesterday by a shareholder group critical of Barclays in
an advertisement in the Independent on Sunday.
The group has asked shareholders to vote for a 'manifesto for the recovery
and prosperity of the bank' at an EGM.
The group is based at the same London address as the Safe pressure group
formed by dissatisfied small business customers of Barclays.
