
TV'S THATCHER celebration season recently featured a variant on the old
chestnut 'Where you when you such-and-such happened?' The moment for which
memories were prodded was the ex-PM's abdication. And did we all remember
where we were? And is our recall as strong for other flashpoints in 20th
century history? Consider your answers now, for November is a video month
full of movies torn from the headlines and you may be tested.
Where were you when President Kennedy was shot? Michelle Pfeiffer as the
Dallas-dwelling heroine of Love Field (Columbia TriStar) was right there in
the same town. This tangy tragicomedy-cum-road-movie was never released in
UK cinemas - too offbeat perhaps for Mr and Mrs Popcorn - but is well worth
a look now. JFK-adoring Pfeiffer treks across America towards his funeral,
meeting a country changed and still changing in the wake of three years of
hope and one day of horror. Miss P, Oscar-nominated for best actress, won
that accolade at the Berlin Film Festival.
Where were you during the Cuban Missile Crisis? Ninety miles from Cuba if
you were one of the characters in Joe Dante's delicious period lampoon
Matinee (Guild). John Goodman plays the 1960s horror director visiting Key
West to unveil his new movie, plus multi-megaton gimmicks, while real-life
horrors threaten to explode offshore. Funny, evocative, inventive.
Where were you when you heard about the Andes plane crash? Wherever you
were, you can relive it now in Alive (CIC), the film of the book of the
disaster. Script and characterisation are sometimes wobbly, but the settings
are chillingly credible, the crash the most realistic in memory, and the
outcome as inspirational as it was in real life.
Where were you when Elvis Presley died? Probably anticipating the
clone-intensive mania that would follow. Honeymoon In Vegas (First
Independent) is the cinema's latest and best comic bulletin on Elvis
necrophilia. Nicolas Cage, James Caan and Sarah Jessica Parker enact a kooky
triangular romance in Las Vegas - or try to - while the town is rained on,
literally, by Presley lookalikes. Ex-screenwriter Andrew Bergman (Blazing
Saddles) directs.
Where were you the first time a major Hollywood star was cryogenically
frozen? Watching the enjoyable multi-tissue romance Forever Young (Warner),
where Mel Gibson receives the deep-freeze treatment as a 1939 airman scarred
by love and wanting to lose consciousness until 1989. Here he meets - yes -
love again. But he is better equipped to deal with it, having had 50 years
to sleep on the matter. Jamie Lee Curtis co-stars, the Pacific coast
settings almost steal the film.
Where were you when Robert Redford offered your wife Dollars 1m for a night
of passion? In Las Vegas (again) if you were Woody Harrelson in Indecent
Proposal (CIC), putting up a token show of righteous resistance before
pocketing the money. Demi Moore is the tug-of-war wife, Adrian Lyne of Fatal
Attraction the tug-of-styles director. The film ends as a romantic cop-out,
but the early temptation scenes have a cynical glitter.
Where should you be this weekend to escape the extended firework season
and/or more TV Thatchermania? Sampling, I suggest, major moments from world
cinema past and present as video's long arm reaches ever further into time
and space. November is the richest month for some time. A great French
classic? Les Enfants Du Paradis (Artificial Eye). A great German classic?
Pandora's Box (Tartan Video). Elizabeth Taylor in her prime? Cat On A Hot
Tin Roof (MGM/UA). Alfred Hitchcock in his prime? North By Northwest (CIC).
Modern British self-portraiture at its poetic best? Terence Davies's The
Long Day Closes (Curzon).
Alternatively - if Maggie withdrawal symptoms become too strong - you can
turn to an Australian film with the month's most tantalising title. It is
Blood Camp Thatcher (VIPCO), a straight-to-video movie unknown to me (as
yet), though it clearly casts a whole new light on those Downing Street
years.
