
MICROSOFT, dubbed the 'bully' of the computer software industry by some
competitors, is crying foul. Under investigation for alleged anti-trust
violations in the US and the EC, the company claims it is the victim of a
smear campaign.
Competitors 'are spreading lies about us', Mr Bill Gates, Microsoft chairman
and chief executive, told industry analysts at the company's Redmond,
Washington, headquarters recently.
Within the software industry he is unlikely to find much sympathy. Microsoft
dominates the world market for personal computer software and is renowned
for its aggressive marketing tactics. For years Microsoft has shrugged off
as mere envy mounting complaints from competitors alleging unfair business
practices.
But now, with the US Justice Department and EC competition authorities
digging through its books, Microsoft is becoming increasingly sensitive to
criticism from competitors, particularly Novell, the leading supplier of PC
networking software, which it views as the instigator of its problems with
anti-trust authorities.
'Novell is trying to make government agencies suspicious of the way we do
business, trying to paint a negative picture of Microsoft,' said Mr Bill
Neukom, Microsoft's chief counsel.
Novell played an active role in supplying information to the US Federal
Trade Commission during its three-year anti-trust investigation of
Microsoft. It also promoted the transfer of the case to the US Justice
Department when the FTC reached a deadlock over whether to take action; and
it filed complaints against Microsoft with the EC competition authorities.
Now Novell has revealed details of a previously secret 1992 attempt by
Microsoft to buy its tormentor during the FTC's anti-trust probe, which
shows another dimension to the animosity between the two companies.
According to Novell, Mr Gates contacted Mr Ray Noorda, Novell chairman and
chief executive, in July 1991, days after Novell had announced plans to
acquire Digital Research, a small developer of personal computer operating
systems, to discuss a merger. As an independent company, Digital Research
presented no threat to Microsoft's domination of the PC operating system
market, but as part of Novell it might have become a serious challenger to
Microsoft's cash cow, MS-DOS, the most widely used PC operating system
program.
According to Mr David Bradford, Novell's chief counsel, Mr Gates stipulated
that the newly acquired Digital Research could not be part of any deal.
Taking Microsoft's approach at face value, Novell engaged in negotiations.
And in what turned out to be a critical mistake, it put Digital Research on
the back burner for the duration of the talks, suspending its plans to
promote the company's DR-DOS system in competition with Microsoft's MS-DOS.
In late February 1992, Microsoft presented a written offer to Novell to
acquire the company for more than Dollars 12bn (Pounds 7.9bn). The following
month, Microsoft met Novell's board to discuss the offer. A day later,
Novell learned from press reports that Microsoft had announced its
acquisition of another software company, Fox Software. Stunned, Novell
called off the talks and aborted the deal, according to Mr Bradford.
Novell alleges that Microsoft was not negotiating in good faith and that its
ulterior motive may have been to remove the threat of competition in the
operating system market.
Microsoft offers a very different and equally plausible interpretation. At
first, according to Microsoft, Mr Gates saw the potential for a 'win-win'
merger of the largest PC software company with the largest supplier of PC
networking software. Customers would have benefited from improved
compatibility between the companies' software products, which are frequently
used together.
Digital Research had nothing to do with Microsoft's interest in merging with
Novell, Mr Neukom insists. In fact it created a potential impediment to the
deal.
With regard to the Fox Software acquisition, Mr Neukom says that Microsoft
'had no intent to hide anything from Novell', but that the two deals were
quite separate. Fox is a developer of data-base management software that is
only tangentially related to Novell's networking products.
Was Microsoft negotiating in good faith? 'Our letter of intent demonstrated
a certain seriousness of purpose,' Mr Neukom said. Whatever the intent, the
effect of the protracted negotiations was to delay Novell's efforts to bring
a competitive PC operating system, based on Digital Research technology, to
market. Only after the talks ended did Novell begin its efforts to compete
more aggressively with Microsoft, so far with little success.
Novell alleges that the delay, combined with Microsoft's monopolistic
licensing of MS-DOS, has cost it dearly, estimating its damages at Dollars
3bn.
