
For the networking neophyte, entering the Internet feels like arriving in a
foreign city where you don't know a soul and can't speak or read the
language. At first, you suffer from culture shock and finding your way
around is a real challenge.
To master the Internet, you should be prepared to invest considerable time
and effort. 'User friendly' is not a term that has penetrated cyberspace.
Prior experience in using commercial on-line information services such as
Compuserve, Prodigy or America Online will give you a head-start. For many
PC users, these easy-to-use services may prove more rewarding than launching
into the unstructured world of the Internet. They have recently started
offering an electronic mail service over the Internet at a small charge.
If you have a taste for something more adventurous, or a more limited
budget, sign up with one of the Internet public access services  - CIX in
the UK and The Well in California are well-known among Internet aficionados.
Participating in one of the numerous conferences or newsgroups that are
constantly under way on the Internet is a good way to get your feet wet.
While you can learn a lot from these, the most valuable function of the
Internet is the access
that it provides to remote databases. Learning how and where to find useful
information is the biggest challenge for Internet users.
Several information search-and-retrieval tools are available on the
Internet. The best known include Archie, Gopher, WAIS and World Wide Web.
Each offers a standard method of finding information and downloading it from
various computers on the Internet. Details of how to use these programs can
be found in several Internet guidebooks.*
But even if you know where to look for whatever it is you are trying to find
on the Internet, you still face the challenge of figuring out the commands
needed to get to the files you are seeking.
Unfortunately, depending upon the type of computer you are using, and where
your travels take you on the Internet, you may find yourself facing
computers that 'speak' several different dialects.
A knowledge of the Unix operating system is 'useful', the experts suggest.
This is rather like saying that it may be useful to speak French if you are
going to live in France. You can survive without the language, but will be
at a big disadvantage.
Even disconnecting from the system can be a challenge. 'Try one of these
commands: exit, quit, logout, leave, goodbye, ciao, disconnect, CTRL-D or
CTRL-Z,' Tracy LaQuey and Jeanne Ryer advise in The Internet Companion, a
beginner's guide. If none of these works, 'press lots of keys to abort'.
With luck you will hit the right combination.
If this sounds like too much to handle, do not despair. America Online, one
of the easy-to-use commercial information services, is promising to deliver
full Internet access via its point-and-click graphical interface next year.
In the meantime, the good news is that sending and receiving electronic mail
on the Internet is quite straightforward. Put an Internet address on your
business card and everyone will assume you are already a network wizard.
