
THE south-east Asian region, encompassing South Korea, Taiwan and the Asean
block, has become an important force within the global automotive industry,
and is providing the world's vehicle and components manufacturers with some
of the strongest growth rates and most substantial business opportunities to
be found anywhere in the world.
During the 1990s the current boom in vehicle output is set to continue apace
in the wake of rapidly-growing local demand and the development by a number
of companies of important export markets. From a total output across the
region of 2.9m vehicles in 1992 (1.9m passenger cars and 1m commercial
vehicles) production is expected to increase substantially into the early
years of the next century and beyond.
The recently-published Financial Times Management Report, The Emerging
Asia-Pacific Automotive Industry: Growth and Opportunities from South Korea
to Turkey, which examines this sector in some depth is, for example,
forecasting that by the year 2002 some 4.6m passenger cars and 2.8m
commercial vehicles a year could be produced in South Korea, Taiwan,
Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines.
According to this report, particularly strong growth is identified as likely
in the automotive industries of Taiwan, Thailand and the Philippines (in the
latter country from a very small base level of a few tens of thousands of
units) for the 10-year period up to the year 2002.
Growth in South Korean vehicle manufacturing is also likely to be
substantial over the next decade - especially if plans by one or more
participants in that industry for the establishment of overseas plants come
to fruition.
Vietnam, which is expected to enjoy rapid economic growth in the foreseeable
future, is also expected to emerge as a producer.
So far, the motor vehicle industries of Taiwan and the Asean block have been
largely dominated by Japanese multinationals,
although opportunities have existed for American and European automakers,
and will, indeed, continue to present themselves over the coming years.
Of Taiwan's current tally of 10 vehicle manufacturers in early 1993, eight
assemble Japanese makes and three American or European models. One company,
Yeu Tyan Machinery Manufacturing, assembles both Daihatsu and Peugeot
vehicles. Despite heavy Japanese involvement in the Taiwanese automotive
industry, however, Ford has, managed to develop the leading position within
this sector.
In 1992, the Ford Lio Ho Motor Company, in which Ford Motor Company has a
majority shareholding, accounted for more than a quarter of total vehicle
output in Taiwan, and is planning an increase in production in the 1980s.
Another western opportunity in Taiwan is in the process of being realised:
Volkswagen vans are to be produced by the Ching Chung Motor Company from
late 1993.
In Thailand, several makes of European vehicles are assembled in modest
quantities by local companies, although General Motors is thought to be
considering the re-commencement of assembly operations in conjunction with
the Bangchan General Assembly Company. GM withdrew in 1978 from assembly in
that country. The excellent potential of the Thai motor vehicle market could
lead several other western carmakers to re-evaluate opportunities.
As in Thailand, the Malaysian motor vehicle assembly sector is almost
totally dominated by Japanese models, although seven European makes of
passenger car, and one American, were assembled in 1992 in very low
quantities. Several other such operations are currently either starting up
or planned. In addition, the official first and second national car projects
involve respectively Mitsubishi and Daihatsu - although it is not
inconceivable that an opportunity for a western luxury car manufacturer
could present itself at some stage in the future, should a third national
car project ever be formulated.
The position in Indonesia is little different from that in Thailand and
Malaysia, although General Motors has been negotiating with two local
companies for the establishment of further vehicle assembly agreements.
Within the small vehicle assembly industry of the Philippines, Mercedes-Benz
in March 1993 received approval from the Board of Investments for the
assembly of two models by the Commercial Motors Corporation under the
newly-opened luxury car category of the car development programme.
