
THE NORTH Korean nuclear issue was 'entering a critical phase' and must be
resolved soon, South Korea's President Kim Young-sam said yesterday. His
meeting with President Bill Clinton in Washington on November 23 could prove
'the decisive discussion on the issue,' he added.
President Kim plans to meet China's President Jiang Zemin during the
Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation conference in Seattle on November 19.
China has indicated it may block a possible attempt by the UN Security
Council to impose economic sanctions on North Korea if it does not accept
international nuclear inspections soon.
A national security meeting headed by Mr Kim yesterday saw no sign of
military provocation by North Korea. 'There is some military movement in
North Korea, but not of the type associated with an offensive undertaking,'
he explained.
The US Defence Department refuted reports of a sudden build-up of North
Korean forces on the South Korean border. A senior US defence official was
quoted at the weekend as suggesting North Korea might be preparing to attack
South Korea soon, out of economic desperation.
'There was no mention that the department felt an attack by the North
Koreans was imminent. That was never said and never even implied,' a
spokesman said in clarifying the official's remarks.
'There has been a build-up of North Korean conventional forces near the
border area along the demilitarised zone gradually over the past 10 years.
The senior official described some things worrying the department. One of
them is the North Korean economy; second, the trend to the build-up of
conventional forces along the border.'
Officials in Seoul expressed cautious optimism that a diplomatic solution to
the impasse over the international inspection of North Korea's nuclear
facilities could still be reached.
They said one sign was a meeting on Tuesday between US and North Korean
officials in New York, called at the request of Pyongyang. No progress was
reported, but it indicated North Korea was unwilling to abandon negotiations
with Washington in seeking a solution to nuclear inspections.
Some South Korean officials believe North Korea is engaged in brinkmanship
complicated by disagreements within the Pyongyang government over the future
course of talks. But Mr Kim expressed frustration that North Korea
'counteracts with an irrelevant issue' whenever Seoul and Washington want
nuclear inspections resumed.
