
BOTH Germany's main political parties could end up the losers from an
extraordinary legal decision to order a new state election in the city of
Hamburg, the second smallest of the country's 16 Lander.
The move, ordered by the constitutional court in the city because of an
'undemocratic' selection process of candidates for Chancellor Helmut Kohl's
Christian Democratic Union, means a re-run of the poll held in 1991.
It is the first time a state election has had to be repeated since the
foundation of the federal republic.
Yet in spite of the blame lying clearly at the door of the CDU, the biggest
losers could be the Social Democrats.
The 1991 election in Hamburg, Germany's second largest city after Berlin,
was won by the SPD, with an absolute majority of just one seat, but it could
now face serious defections because of the disarray of the party at national
level.
Although the SPD welcomed the decision yesterday, it is in chaos following
the resignation on Monday of its leader, Mr Bjorn Engholm, and a rapid
outbreak of infighting over the succession.
An immediate opinion poll in the city showed the Social Democrats gaining
just 40 per cent of the votes, compared with 48 per cent in 1991.
The CDU, however, is also lagging in popularity nationally, thanks to the
sharp economic recession, and the high costs of German unification. The fact
that the city party has been found guilty of undemocratic procedures in its
own candidate selection seems likely to lose it further support.
The same opinion poll, carried out by the Dortmund-based Forsa institute,
puts the CDU on 34 per cent, one point down on 1991.
The new election therefore opens the way for widespread protest voting
against the main political establishment, with probable gains for fringe
parties such as the Greens and the extreme right-wing Republicans or
Deutsche Volksunion (DVU).
A large proportion of non-voters is also to be expected, given the
circumstances of the election.
The Greens were supported by 16 per cent of voters polled yesterday,
compared with just 7.2 per cent in 1991, while non-voters showed an increase
from 35 to 39 per cent.
The court decision is a serious embarrassment for Mr Kohl's CDU, which was
accused of not allowing minority groups to propose alternative candidates to
the party list put forward by the leadership. The party failed to observe
the inner-party democracy required by the constitution, it said.
However, the SPD is in no position to exploit its position. Campaigns are
gaining momentum for a whole variety of candidates for the national party
leadership. The front runner is Mr Gerhard Schroder, the current premier of
Lower Saxony, but he also faces strong opposition for apparent disloyalty to
Mr Engholm.
