
GOING GLOBAL: HOW EUROPE HELPS SMALL FIRMS TO EXPORT by William Nothdurft
German Marshall Fund, 11 Dupont Circle, NW, Washington DC 20036
FOR MODERN trade alchemists, the perfect export promotion policy may be the
ever-elusive philosopher's stone. In his quest for this magical device that
might turn base domestic manufacturers into gold-winning exporters, William
Nothdurft calls on fellow US alchemists to look to Europe's practitioners of
export promotion to discover 'the way'.
The breathless voyage across Europe that he charts in Going Global is
fascinating, of immense value to exporters, export organisations and
bureaucrats attempting to define their role in export promotion. But, as
with the original alchemists, he is probably searching in vain.
He is no doubt correct to berate successive US administrations for leaving
export promotion in a muddle. He is also probably right to suggest that
European governments have messed with export promotion strategies more than
the US. But he is probably wrong to suggest that Europe's government's have
in contrast got things notably right.
His pages detail how small and medium sized companies - the principal
targets of export promotion effort - play as marginal a part in Europe's
export effort as they do in the US, suffering the same limitations, and the
same myopias.
As he tracks the immense diversity of programmes tried across Europe, and
reveals how short-lived so many of them are, he unwittingly shows a picture
as riddled with contradictions, as littered with wasted efforts, and as
limited in its success, as he complains of in the US.
A British reader must suspect naivety when Mr Nothdurft opens his book with
a eulogy about London's Docklands, where 'one of the world's great trading
centres is being reborn'. Regular visitors to Docklands will puzzle at when
he stumbled across the 'din of an international airport from which a new
generation of merchants commutes to the trading capitals of a
soon-to-be-integrated European market.'
Mr Nothdurft seems to discern order in Europe where most others see a chaos
not unlike that which he complains about in the US. But this is not to rob
the book of its value. Governments have shown a remarkable inability over
the past decades to discover how best to help exporters, and Mr Nothdurft's
comparison of schemes from the length and breadth of Europe provide valuable
food for thought.
