
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton said yesterday the US should not intervene in Bosnia
without the support of its allies, despite the mounting pressure on the
administration to take some kind of military action against the Bosnian
Serbs.
Mr Clinton said he expected the administration's review of US policy on
Bosnia to be completed within the next few days. 'I do not think we should
act alone, unilaterally, nor do I think we will have to,' he said.
The president repeated that he had not ruled out any option for action,
except the direct intervention in Bosnia by US ground troops and that he had
high hopes of reaching agreement on joint action with Britain, France and
other European allies.
The debate in the US administration over the right course of action in
Bosnia broke into the open yesterday, with the US ambassador to the United
Nations urging Mr Clinton to order air strikes against the Bosnian Serbs to
help the hard-pressed Moslem population.
The ambassador, Mrs Madeleine Albright, is understood to have argued that
the US cannot turn its back on its international responsibilities and should
be prepared to act alone if it cannot persuade its European allies to join
it.
The New York Times also reported that 12 mid-level State Department officers
handling the Balkan region had implored Secretary of State Warren
Christopher to end 'western capitulation to Serbian aggression' and use
military force in Bosnia.
Mr Christopher has been reluctant to embrace military options and warned
this week that air strikes might halt the UN relief operations in Bosnia.
This argument against military action has also been deployed by Britain and
France, both of which have troops under the UN flag in Bosnia.
A similar debate also divides the Pentagon, where Defence Secretary Les
Aspin appears open to the idea that air strikes might deter aggression,
while General Colin Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, remains
sceptical.
At the White House, Mr Anthony Lake, Mr Clinton's chief national security
adviser, is understood to be among those arguing for air strikes.
European Community foreign ministers will discuss the full range of military
and diplomatic options to end the fighting in Bosnia at Hindsgavl Castle,
near Copenhagen, today.
EC members remain as divided as the US administration, with the majority
leaning towards a tightening of new sanctions against Serbia and Montenegro.
President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia said yesterday that he had urged Mr
Clinton to call a summit of all the leaders of the warring factions in the
former Yugoslavia to resolve the Balkan conflict.
Meanwhile, the self-styled Bosnian Serb parliament met behind closed doors
in Bosanski Novi, near the border with Croatia, yesterday, to decide once
again whether it would accept a peace plan brokered by the UN and European
Community mediators, Mr Cyrus Vance and Lord Owen.
The Security Council has warned the Bosnian Serbs that, if they do not
accept the plan by April 26, draconian new sanctions against Serbia and
Montenegro, approved by the council last week, will be implemented without
further delay. Bosnian Croats and Moslems have already signed the plan,
which would divide Bosnia-Hercegovina into 10 semi-autonomous provinces.
However, the parliament was not expected to make its final decision until
after a meeting between its leader, Mr Radovan Karadzic, and Lord Owen in
Belgrade later yesterday. 'We are trying hard to find solutions acceptable
for the Serbs after some modifications, some changes to the plan,' Mr
Karadzic said.
Lord Owen said a plan to create a UN-monitored corridor through Bosnia was
being discussed which would address a big concern of the Serbs.
He said the exact nature of the corridor, the size of the demilitarised zone
which would surround it and guarantees of international access to it still
had to be worked out.
Senior aides last night thought the zone would be about 700 square miles in
northern Bosnia - mostly in province 3, designated as Croat under the
international peace plan.
As the parliament met, a six-member UN Security Council mission headed for
Bosnia to make a first-hand appraisal of the war, amid calls from
non-aligned members of the 15-member Security Council for stronger action
against the Bosnian Serbs.
