
Country managers used to be the barons, if not the kings, of most
multinational companies. But now most of them are being cut down to the size
of mere ambassadors.
As their companies strive to accelerate decision-taking, to slash head
office costs, and to achieve greater all-round global co-ordination and
efficiency, most of their power - sometimes even over sales and distribution -is being transferred either to regional czars, or more often to the heads
of worldwide product divisions.
As a result many country managers have either been pensioned off early, or
are suffering severe demotivation as they bow to the inevitable relegation
of their role.
In a growing number of companies, such as ICI, Britain's largest chemicals
combine, 'country management' is being reduced to a part-time
representational role, carried out by a senior divisional manager (see this
page, Feb 1).
But should the fate of country managers be so inevitable? Is it even
sensible?
Or should companies treat them in a less standardised way, adapting their
role more carefully to the company's stage of organisational evolution, and
to each country's different conditions?
There is nothing either inevitable or sensible about a blanket approach,
according to the initial findings of a study being undertaken by John
Quelch, a professor at the Harvard Business School.
Companies should think far more carefully about what kind of country manager
they need in each national situation, says Quelch. They should also
recognise that, even when it is sensible to transfer most power to global
divisions, country managers can be motivated by developing new skills. These
include encouraging the export and import of good ideas between
subsidiaries.
Quelch is now extending his study to 200 country general managers. So far it
has been based on interviews with 50 executives in 12 Asian, European and
North American multinationals in services, consumer and industrial products.
The executives' responses range from demotivation to surprising expressions
of secret content at a narrowing of their responsibilities.  - so long as
they retain their titles, that is.
In a working paper called The New Country Managers which describes his
initial conclusions*, Quelch quotes one executive, presumably of the
demotivated variety, saying lugubriously that his type of role will not
actually disappear, since 'governments still need one man to go after, to
put in jail'.
Quelch's categorisation of country managers is in line with a suggestion in
his paper that companies are evolving through several stages towards a
relatively standard 'global' type of organisation.
This would be disputed by fellow academics: some Japanese and other
companies are moving in the reverse direction, from centralised global to a
much more complex and flexible structure which has become known as
'transnational'.
But Quelch's four-stage categorisation is useful all the same:
When a company goes international, it may establish wholly-owned country
subsidiaries in its larger, more promising markets, sometimes acquiring
local distributors. The company managers needed for these young subsidiaries
are 'traders' who focus primarily on sales and distribution.
To achieve local market penetration, the company devolves more functional
responsibilities to country managers. They develop and manufacture an ever
broader line of locally adapted products. The company becomes a genuine
'multinational' and country managers, evaluated on the profits they deliver,
become 'potentates'.
To achieve the benefits of greater integration of its activities on a
'transnational' basis, the company reduces the country manager's
decision-making authority over research and development, purchasing and
manufacturing. It consolidates these functions in centres of excellence
(which may be regional or global). Marketing decision are shifted to the
regional level. The country manager remains involved, but has to be a team
player, a 'cabinet member'.
In fully 'global' organisations, worldwide divisions (or 'lines-of
business') dominate the organisation. The country manager is now an
'ambassador'.
Since most multinationals are at varying stages of development around the
world, they need more than one type of country manager - a portfolio with
different sets of skills, Quelch argues.
A European consumer goods company, for instance, might appoint 'cabinet
members' as country managers in an increasingly integrated Europe, but put
'traders' into Asia, where markets are growing faster and national
socio-economic differences are greater. Meanwhile the 'potentates' who run
the company's operations in Latin America, where tariff barriers still limit
cross-border commerce, might still remain in place.
Country managers should become a mixed breed of high-fliers, in other words,
not a cloned race of almost has-beens.
*An edited version of the paper will be published in the next issue of the
McKinsey Quarterly, available at the end of this month.
