
South Korea has reasserted its influence in the negotiations to resolve the
North Korean nuclear issue, but at a possible cost of delaying a quick
solution to the dispute.
In his meeting with President Bill Clinton in Washington on Tuesday, South
Korean president Kim Young-sam sidetracked a US proposal that would have
suspended the joint Team Spirit military exercise in return for North Korea
accepting the resumption of routine international nuclear inspections and
exchanging special envoys with Seoul to discuss nuclear issues.
Instead, the two leaders said the North would have to fulfil the two
conditions before concessions would be made. The statement amounted to a
rejection of a recent North Korean proposal that Washington and Pyongyang
make simultaneous compromises as part of a package solution.
South Korea has been concerned about recent US press reports that Washington
was seriously considering the North Korean offer, which conflicts with
Seoul's position that Pyongyang has to make the first concession. The unease
felt by South Korean officials over the North's proposal was that it would
lead to direct negotiations between Pyongyang and Washington, leaving Seoul
on the sidelines.
The main worry expressed by South Korean officials was that the talks
between Washington and Pyongyang would focus on inspections conducted by the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), ignoring the issue of
inter-Korean nuclear inspections.
Mutual nuclear inspections between the two Koreas lie at the heart of the
present dispute. Seoul demanded last year that North Korea accept
inspections of suspected nuclear facilities in compliance with a bilateral
non-nuclear treaty that North and South Korea signed in December 1991.
Pyongyang refused the request, explaining the treaty did not support this
demand.
In response, Seoul sought to press Pyongyang by asking Washington to resume
the annual US-South Korean Team Spirit military exercise this year, South
Korean foreign ministry officials say.
Team Spirit had been suspended in 1992 as a goodwill gesture by Washington
in response to North Korea's signing of the non-nuclear treaty with the
South. Shortly after, Pyongyang agreed to accept routine IAEA inspections of
its nuclear facilities. But last autumn's decision to resume Team Spirit
angered Pyongyang.
Last March, it threatened to pull out of the nuclear non-proliferation
treaty and stop IAEA inspections, citing resumption of Team Spirit as one
reason, and protesting at an IAEA demand that it accept inspections of
undeclared facilities.
Some analysts believe North Korea refused the IAEA request for special
inspections because it would have created a precedent for accepting similar
inspections by South Korea, the issue at the centre of their disagreements
over mutual inspections.
