
FARES on London Transport, Scotrail and Network SouthEast are to rise by an
average of 6 per cent from next January, it was announced yesterday, Rachel
Johnson writes.
Travelcards, which offer unlimited use of London Tube and bus services for
daily, weekly and longer periods, are to rise by an average of 7.7 per cent.
The projected revenue from fare increases on London Transport is expected to
amount to Pounds 52m more than total fare revenue in 1993.
Fares on most InterCity routes, however, have been frozen. The operator took
the 'strategic decision' to respond to continuing sluggish demand with a
fares freeze.
The rises outstrip the present rate of retail price inflation by up to four
times. But they are much lower than was suggested in documents leaked during
the summer. These indicated that London fares were to rise by up to 16 per
cent.
Network SouthEast has to make up a Pounds 230m shortfall to meet financial
targets next year. It warned yesterday that the 6 per cent average increase
would not be enough to stave off a deterioration in service levels.                              *      *      *
FARE RISES FROM JANUARY 1994
London Transport (Underground and bus service)
Average 6 per cent overall rise on tubes and buses
Travelcards increases average of 7.7 per cent, highest 10 per cent: eg
Travelcard will rise to Pounds 13 from Pounds 11.90
Most single fares go up by 10p: eg Finsbury Park to Green Park rises to
Pounds 1.30 from Pounds 1.20.
Many bus fares to remain unchanged
Projected revenue from fare increases: Pounds 52m more than fare revenue in
1993?
NETWORK SOUTHEAST
Season tickets rise an average of 6 per cent
Offpeak fare rises 'pegged' to 4 per cent to attract leisure travellers
Fare rises to reflect performance: eg 8 per cent to account for punctuality
and reliability on Chiltern line, Northampton, West Anglia, Great Northern,
SouthWestern, and Thameslink; but 3 per cent to reflect lower standards on
Kent Coast and Thames routes
INTERCITY
No rise in all first class, business and most leisure fares
InterCity Standard Open singles or returns to rise by average of 3 per cent:
eg open return from London to Glasgow to rise to Pounds 126 from Pounds 122
Season tickets to follow increases on parallel Network SoutheSE routes
