
THE Indian government yesterday gave the go-ahead for direct foreign
investment proposals worth Rs6.17bn (Pounds 129.5m).
The decision opens the way for eight big foreign companies to enter newly
liberalised Indian markets.
These include Coca Cola and Pepsico, the US soft drinks giants, Peugeot, the
French car manufacturer, finance companies GE Capital and Morgan Stanley,
Nippon Denro, the Japanese steel manufacturer, and the Scotch whisky maker
Seagram and United Distillers, the spirits arm of Guinness.
Coca Cola will return to India 15 years after it was evicted by the Janata
government of 1977. Coca Cola South Asia will promote a new wholly-owned
venture in India, with a capital of Dollars 20m (Pounds 13.3m). The proposal
projects exports over the first seven years, with export earnings expected
to exceed the import cost of raw material, and has offered to reinvest the
dividends in India for that period.
The cabinet committee on foreign investment has also allowed Pepsico to
raise its equity to 51 per cent and become the main shareholder of Pepsi
foods, which was allowed into India in 1989 with strict export commitments.
The food processing giant will now raise its subscribed and paid-up equity
from Rs800m to Rs1.05bn.
Peugeot of France will establish a joint venture with Indian car maker
Premier Automobiles to produce 60,000 cars a year, introducing the Peugeot
309 and 205 models to India. Peugeot will invest Rs1.20bn in the project,
which has export obligations.
While the GE Capital proposal seeks to establish a wholly-owned subsidiary
in India, with an investment of Dollars 75m to Dollars 100m over the next
three to four years, Morgan Stanley proposes an assets management company in
the mutual funds and funds management industry, inviting direct foreign
investment from foreign institutional investors.
Nippon Denro Ispat, the Indian joint venture with the Japanese steel
manufacturer, will build an integrated steel plant, with an investment of
Rs900m.
The government has set aside its earlier reservations about allowing foreign
spirits manufacturers in.
