
THE 51-day siege of the Branch Davidian religious cult near Waco, Texas,
ended in an inferno yesterday following an attempt by US law enforcement
agents to halt the stand-off.
A fire, which the White House said was deliberately started by followers of
religious zealot Mr David Koresh, destroyed the compound where the cult
members had been holed up.
The White House said FBI agents were doing everything possible to rescue the
95 cult followers from the compound and that at least 20 people had left.
Seventeen children under 10 years old were believed to be inside the
compound with Mr Koresh and his followers.
'They're still pulling people out,' a White House official said, adding that
the FBI did not know how many would survive the fire. FBI agents pulled out
of the compound one reluctant woman who did not want to leave.
The blaze, which razed all the buildings in the compound, prompted fears
that the cult may have embarked on either a mass escape through tunnels or
mass suicide several hours after the FBI fired teargas at them in an attempt
to end the siege.
President Bill Clinton yesterday said he had advance notice of the assault
on the compound, but that attorney-general Janet Reno made the decision to
begin the operation. The president brushed off questions on the subject,
telling reporters: 'I want you to. . . talk to the attorney-general or the
FBI. I knew it was going to be done, but the decision was entirely theirs.'
In London the Foreign Office said 26 British residents were thought to be in
the compound at the time of the blaze. There was no immediate indication of
what happened to Mr Koresh, the religious leader who believes he is the
incarnation of Jesus Christ.
The blaze spread swiftly, punctuated by explosions - possibly from the
cult's vast ammunition stores. By the time firemen arrived little was left
of the cult's large compound.
Mr Koresh last week disappointed federal agents by failing to surrender on
weapons and other charges resulting from the raid, which left four agents
dead, that began the stand-off. He said he had yet to receive his
instructions from God.
Over the weekend Mr Koresh sent a request for a word processor to enable him
to record his revelations. The FBI was evidently no longer prepared to wait.
At 5.55am local time yesterday the cult was telephoned and informed that the
FBI would begin to fire teargas into the compound. Agents moved an armoured
vehicle to the corner of the compound but were met with gunfire.
An estimated 75-80 rounds were fired during the initial engagement.
Occupants were advised by loudspeaker: 'This is not an assault. Do not fire.
If you fire your fire will be returned. We are introducing non-lethal
teargas. Exit the compound now and follow instructions. . . you will not be
harmed.'
Mr Bob Ricks, the FBI agent in charge of the operation, said the teargas was
fired to 'make them as uncomfortable as possible'.
