
NOW THAT costume jewellery is here to stay as a respectable, if not
essential, accessory, it is taking on more gravitas as an art form and
finding a new look for the 'natural nineties'. Art and fashion in jewellery
are converging. At the same time, the demarcation between costume jewellery
and real jewellery is fading.
The 1980s status symbol gilt and glitter couture jewellery is being replaced
by dreamier, talismanic trinkets with more value - whether intrinsic,
artistic or ritualistic - as women search for more 'meaningful' jewellery.
Designers and jewellers are mixing materials and crossing barriers between
real and fake with new abandon.
A whole middle range of decorative, semi-precious jewellery is springing up
from individual designers such as Solange Azagury-Partridge, who works with
massive crystals and upside-down stones set in gold-plated silver, and Dinny
Hall, the golden girl of 1980s fashion jewellery who now works to commission
and sells gold-plated silver ranges rather than way out costume jewellery in
her shop in Westbourne Grove, London.
Part of this new seriousness comes from a recent re-evaluation of 20th
century costume jewellery which has turned into a promising collecting area.
Christie's South Kensington auction house now holds regular sales of
designer costume jewellery and several London shops, including Cobra &
Bellamy, Van Peterson and Steinberg & Tolkien, specialise in period jewels
from the 1920s to the 1960s, particularly the sought-after American makers
such as Miriam Haskell, Trifari, Marcel Boucher and vintage Kenneth Jay Lane
from the 1960s and 1970s.
This field works like the antique jewellery market: the most desirable
pieces, reaching prices in the hundreds, even thousands of pounds, are those
that have ben finely made by big names and beautifully conceived to capture
the mood and fashion of their age, whether it is the Cartier look by Alfred
Philippe, chief designer at Trifari, the glorious sophistication of the
1950s creations by Boucher, or the American Schiaparelli fantasy jewellery
made of smouldering, luminous crystal rocks.
Above all, costume jewellery is no longer junk jewellery. Carol Lister of
Liberty in London says that although costume jewellery went through a
decidedly dull patch, it is now waking up to the new age. Kate Renwick,
buying controller for fashion accessories at Harvey Nichols, finds that
women are buying more jewellery than ever but now prefer a more refined look
to reflect their new mood of dressing in the 90s. 'Jewellery is such a
personal, whimsical purchase that brand or designer labels always come
second,' she says.
In tune with the 1970s fashion revival, there is more than a trace of
arty-craftiness about today's costume jewellery that is not untouched by the
grisly hand of Grunge - such as long, stringy bead necklaces and pendants
and crosses in softly burnished silver or pewter-coloured metal, with
amethysts, turquoise, coral, and jewels replicating natural materials or
using the real thing.
The new, slick Armani range cashes in on naturalism, using imitation
tortoiseshell, jet, mother-of-pearl and ivory, while John Bowman's
ecologically sound jewels, sold at Liberty, are sensitive one-off creations
of Baltic amber mounted on silver or occasionally on gold and hung on
twisted silk or macrame braid. His prices range from about Pounds 150
upwards.
Robert Lee Morris is an artist-jeweller who successfully translated his
themes and inspirations into popular, fashionable costume jewellery, and his
shapes and forms have always been based on organic forms or tribal emblems
and weapons like the dart. His brand of fluid simplicity is still perfect
for today's look.
Other makers are using fossils, pebbles and shell shapes and soft, natural
motifs. The talented Pellini has also long copied natural materials with her
brilliant, tactile resins and synthetics. Eric Beamon, now known as Erickson
Beamon, is scaling and toning everything down. His jewels are smaller and
more intricate, using tiny beads and cameos. Necklaces are either very long
and 'hippie' or old-fashioned chokers.
And finally, wave goodbye to your power earrings. Put them in a shoebox
until they turn into antiques. The new natural earrings are - believe it or
not - small and discreet.
