
ALL but 2 per cent of Dubai's energy requirements are met by gas. But for
the government, with its strategy of creating a long-term self-sustaining
economy based on the tripod of traditional imports and re-exports, tourism,
and further development of Dubai as a regional services and light industries
centre, there can never be enough energy. Nor is it satisfactory for Dubai
to be dependent on only one or two sources of supply.
Some gas reaches Dubai's generators from the four off-shore oilfields which
provide the bulk of Dubai's oil and gas revenues - Fateh, South West Fateh,
Falah and Rashid. Output from the first two has averaged some 200,000
barrels a day and 190,000 b/d respectively. Output from the last two is some
10,000 b/d each. The concession holder is Dubai Petroleum Company (DPC)
consisting of the US's Conoco, the operator, France's Total, the Spanish
company Repsol, and two German companies: RWE, Germany's sixth-largest
industrial group and its biggest electricity generator, and gas company
Wintershall.
Conoco-DPC lifts and markets the crude; Dubai sets the price. It also
markets four or five cargoes a month, each containing some  1/2 m barrels,
so that when traded the government knows what price DPC should also be
getting. Dubai treats crude oil as just another commodity, with the sole
purpose being to maximise value. The approximate published price for
mid-October was Dollars 15.23 a barrel. Dubai gets its revenue from taxes
and royalties levied on DPC.
Since last April, a pilot scheme has operated to inject 100m cu ft a day of
gas to enhance recovery. Signs are that the scheme is proving positive and
that recoverable crude reserves are greater than originally foreseen. The
reinjection scheme is due to run until 2038.
Associated gas is also piped to Dubai Natural Gas Company's processing plant
at Jebel Ali. Most of the liquids - butane, propane, and condensate - are
separated and shipped to Japanese buyers. Some of the liquid gas goes to
Dubai's own products company, Emirates Petroleum Products Company, which
operates its own petrol stations.
A Dollars 2bn refinery with a capacity of 250,000 b/d - almost all of which
would be for export - at Jebel Ali is still being considered. Potential
markets are in India, east Asia and the east coast of Africa. Such a
refinery would also enable Dubai to be self-sufficient in petroleum products -or at least less dependent on Abu Dhabi - even allowing for the
anticipated surge in demand. Some of the dry gas - about 130m cu ft a day -
is used by Dugas itself; some goes to power generators at Dubai's aluminium
smelter and to Dubai city.
The onshore gas and condensate field operated at Margham by Atlantic
Richfield produces some 35,000 b/d of condensate and can produce 400m cu ft
a day of gas. This is all reinjected to maintain reservoir pressure except
when, in high summer, Dubai itself needs extra gas supplies for generators.
In this case up to 150m cu ft a day is available.
Most of Dubai's energy requirements are met by the neighbouring emirate of
Sharjah where the Sajaa gas and condensate field is operated by Amoco. Under
an agreement signed in May 1985, Dubai receives 140m-250m cu ft a day
depending on seasonal demand in Dubai. For this it is thought to have paid
something less than Dollars 1.25 per million cubic feet. Amoco has recently
found more gas and condensate. Other, smaller, gas supplies reach Dubai from
Sharjah's offshore Mubarak field.
Dubai's energy needs last summer averaged 315m cu ft a day, with the annual
average being about 230m cu ft a day. But energy demand is rising almost 20
per cent a year and one estimate puts Dubai's summer consumption in the next
few years at 500m cu ft a day if present growth rates are maintained.
For the time being, this demand can be met from existing sources, but the
narrow spread of suppliers is causing concern. Added to which, gas from
Sajaa and Margham may not last more than 10-15 years.
Dubai has to find other sources of energy. Sporadic talks have been held for
some time with Abu Dhabi, Qatar and Iran, but no agreements have yet been
reached.
