
THE US Commerce Department yesterday announced a liberalisation of export
restrictions on a wide range of computer equipments sold to former communist
countries and to China.
The changes cover all computers with performance up to 67m theoretical
operations per second (67 MTOPS). This includes the latest PCs powered by
Intel's new Pentium microprocessor, many computer work-stations including
most of those produced by Sun Microsystems, and much of IBM's product line,
excluding high-performance mainframe computers and work-stations.
For US computer manufacturers, the loosening of export regulations will much
reduce delays and paperwork in export sales to countries such as China and
those of eastern Europe.
This development provides 'significant interim relief' from export
restrictions, said Intel, leading manufacturer of microprocessors used in
PCs.
IBM called the changes a 'positive move in light of the high potential
demand for our products, especially in China'.
However, the Clinton administration is already considering an even broader
liberalisation 'in a very short period of time', said Mr Steven Goldman,
head of the Commerce Department's Office of Foreign Availability.
He said higher-performance computers may soon be widely available from
countries with no export restrictions. His office cannot make
recommendations based on prospective availability, but the administration
may take that into consideration and act soon on more powerful computer
equipment.
The US will also seek removal of the equivalent export licensing
requirements by allies in the Co-ordinating Committee on Multilateral Export
Controls (Cocom). US allies are usually much more prone to liberalisation so
Cocom is unlikely to object.
Mr Barry Carter, acting under-secretary of commerce, said the liberalisation
'will significantly improve marketing opportunities for US computer
companies, making them more competitive abroad without impairing US national
security'.
Licences will no longer be required for sales of computers to Russia,
Poland, the Czech Republic and Slovakia, as well as China and other
communist countries. The US will continue controls, for foreign policy
reasons, to Iraq and Iran, among others.
The Commerce Department acted on a claim from the American Electronics
Association that comparable computers could be obtained from countries
without export controls.
The AEA wanted decontrol of much more sophisticated equipment with
capabilities up to 210 MTOPS, including high-performance mainframe computers
and some supercomputers.
