
For his party trick, Simon Willcock will copy your credit cards. With a
device twice the size of a mechanical card reader, he transfers the data on
the magnetic strip from one card to another.
His box of tricks is made of perspex so that you can see it contains nothing
more exotic than some tape-recorder heads and simple electronic circuits.
With more sophisticated equipment, Willcock can show you just what data sits
in the magnetic strip on your card. Mostly, it is a seemingly meaningless
sequence of numbers and letters in three parallel 'recording channels'.
Willcock does not counterfeit cards for a living; he wipes clean any copies
he makes with a powerful magnet. He does it to demonstrate the vulnerability
of conventional credit cards.
The party trick is part of a demonstration put on by the Central Research
Laboratory of Thorn EMI, where Willcock heads the magnetics division. CRL
has a vested interest in raising doubts about the security of credit cards:
it has developed a technology that it claims makes it impossible to
duplicate cards.
The Watermark Magnetics technology - so-called because it leaves a permanent
'fingerprint' and is as hard to copy as the watermark in paper - is a
growing business for Thorn Secure Science International (TSSI). As credit
card fraud grows, more and more banks are turning to the company for its
copy-proof magnetic strip.
Since adopting Watermark in the mid-1980s, banks in Sweden have seen the
disappearance of 'phantom withdrawals' where money goes missing from an
account, despite customers' claims that they did not use their cards. TSSI
has just announced the first UK trial with standard Visa payment cards; this
will involve 30,000 cardholders in the Northampton area. The Korean Phone
Card Company has used Watermark since the Seoul Olympics in 1988.
CRL's technology also uses a magnetic strip, but one with a fourth recording
channel. This channel is different magnetically from the conventional
recorded strips that make up the other three channels. It contains 'hard'
data that cannot be erased or copied. 'Whatever you do, you can't get rid of
it,' says Willcock.
Watermark's fourth track carries data that is unique to each card. Just as a
paper watermark is 'written' into the fibres of the paper, so CRL's magnetic
mark is embedded in the strip's 'magnetic domains'. Unlike the domains of a
recording tape, which point along the tape, the domains in CRL's stripe, its
magnetic particles, are at 45 degrees to the tape.
The magnetic domains in one length of tape can point in one of two
directions, with some particles pointing one way, while particles in other
stretches of the tape are at 90 degrees to them. A specially designed tape
reader can detect where the strip goes from one direction to the other. By
arranging these short stretches in a predetermined way, the tape-maker is
effectively creating a special pattern that shows up as a unique sequence of
numbers and letters. From its production plant in Swindon, TSSI delivers to
its customers tapes with an agreed security sequence. The card-maker then
puts the strip on to a plastic card.
By checking for the watermark, an automated cash machine can confirm that
the card is present. With a conventional credit card there is always some
doubt about this. The user's personal identification number (Pin) is
supposed to verify this, but with cards so easy to copy, customers can argue
that a transaction had nothing to do with their card.
While credit cards are an important market for CRL's technology, it has also
found a role in security systems. The Ministry of Defence already employs it
in its Central Headquarters Office Technology System. Before gaining access
to the MOD's electronic mail, users have to insert their 'Watermarked'
cards. And those cards have to stay in place throughout the session.
A further use is in pre-paid cards, for phone calls and transport systems,
for example. Here the risk of duplication is considerable, as it is in cards
used for gaming machines. Australian casinos have adopted Watermark cards
for this application.
If Watermark technology is so secure, why has it not caught on? After all,
it adds just a few pence to the cost of a card. The true costs of adopting a
new technology are those of changing business systems, in installing new
reading machines and registering the issue and numbers of magnetically
protected cards. Financial institutions issue more than a billion cards each
year for financial transactions alone.
On the other side of the balance sheet, fraud is a growing problem for
banks. They are looking for ways of reducing their losses. Alternatives to
Watermark's 'hard strip' include 'smart cards' with electronic chips that
hold large amounts of data. While smart cards can also reduce fraud, Thorn
EMI maintains that they are no more secure than its magnetic stripe, and are
considerably dearer.
The company forecasts a growing demand for its system. It has issued
magnetic strips for more than 500m cards, and now makes about 70m a year.
