
THE government is about to announce that it is planning to privatise the
Docklands Light Railway, which links the City of London with Canary Wharf
and Stratford in east London.
The move is likely to reinforce suspicions that privatisation could extend
beyond British Rail to smaller urban systems such as London Underground and
the Tyne & Wear Metro.
However, the Department of Transport said that privatising the Docklands
Light Railway would require separate legislation from the Railways Bill
currently going through parliament.
The move was foreshadowed in the Conservative party's general election
manifesto last year which said the government would seek to privatise the
Docklands Light Railway during the present parliament's lifetime.
Until recently the commitment had been considered to be lying dormant
because of the railway's unreliability and because the failure of the Canary
Wharf development meant it would carry far fewer passengers than expected.
However, the government is now about to appoint the management consultancy
arm of Ernst & Young, the accountants, to draw up a list of options for
fulfilling the manifesto commitment.
If a stock market flotation or outright sale is chosen, the railway's new
owners will need continuing subsidies because the railway costs six times as
much to run as it collects in fares.
An alternative would be to privatise it in the same way as BR by inviting
the private sector to bid for a franchise to operate the railway. The
contract would go to the company requiring the lowest subsidy.
The Docklands Light Railway cost Pounds 77m to build. From its opening in
1987, its performance was disrupted by an Pounds 800m expansion programme to
cope with the increased demands that were expected to be created by the
Canary Wharf development.
One reason the government wants to press ahead with privatisation is because
of the need to fund a proposed Pounds 130m extension of the railway from the
southern tip of the Isle of Dogs to Lewisham in south-east London.
The government would like the extension to be privately funded, and the
simplest way to achieve that would be to have the line built by the
private-sector owner of the rest of the railway.
