
Anthony Gould enjoys traffic jams. He wallows in them in Kuala Lumpur and in
Jakarta.
He goes looking for them in China. In Bangkok, he sits back and lets the
traffic envelop him.
Mr Gould is head of the Asian operations of Peek, a British company
specialising in traffic control systems.
Asia has some horrendous traffic problems: Mr Gould and Peek see great
opportunities in offering solutions.
'In 1992 only 3 per cent of our turnover was in Asia' says Mr Gould. 'Within
three years we aim to have up to 40 per cent of our revenues generated in
this region.'
Peek started life 20 years ago as an investment holding company. Since a
capital reconstruction in 1986 it has specialised in various types of road
traffic equipment and management systems.
Peek now bills itself as the world's leading manufacturer of traffic
controllers, the boxes which sit by traffic lights and control the signals.
In recent years Peek has acquired the traffic control operations of Philips
in the Netherlands, and Ferranti traffic information systems. Other
businesses have been acquired in the Nordic countries, Germany and the US.
Turnover has risen from Pounds 14.7m in 1987 to Pounds 88.8m last year. Pre
tax profits last year were Pounds 7.1m.
Now, with business slow elsewhere, the focus is on the fast developing
countries of Asia.
The big prize so far has been a Pounds 6.5m contract won earlier this year
to supply and install traffic controllers at 143 junctions throughout
Bangkok.
The controllers will form an integrated network, with more than 2,000
detectors or sensors relaying information on traffic build-up at the
junctions to a central computer - a system aimed at reducing jams in a city
which is among the most traffic-clogged in the world.
Similar systems are in operation in 40 British towns and cities, including
central London.
'Bangkok and other Asian cities are now realising that traffic congestion is
a serious impediment to further growth' says Mr Gould.
'We don't offer all the solutions but at least we can be a big help.'
Peek is negotiating to install similar systems in Jakarta, the Indonesian
capital, and the nearby city of Bandung.
Business is promising in Malaysia.
In Singapore, Peek earlier this year took a 49 per cent stake in the local
Kee Eng Chin Electrical company, which installs and maintains traffic
equipment throughout the island republic.
Like many companies, Peek is looking to China for a great leap forward in
its business.
'The scale of the road building programme in China is staggering' says Mr
Gould.
'Over the next five years China plans to build more than 100,000km of
highway. And these plans are not just on the drawing board. Many of them are
already being put into action.'
At the beginning of the year, Peek took a 45 per cent stake in a largely
state controlled engineering company in Sichuan province in southern China.
The joint venture has been concentrating its sales efforts on Hainan, the
Chinese island south of Hong Kong which has long been a favourite holiday
destination among Chinese but is now designated as a special economic zone.
The local economy on Hainan has been growing at more than 20 per cent each
year - and high economic growth rates have brought traffic problems.
Peek recently signed a Pounds 3m contract to supply and install traffic
management systems in Haikou, Hainan's biggest city. Another Pounds 7m worth
of business is likely to grow out of the project.
'The contract took nine months to negotiate and involved us taking local
officials to Britain and showing them how the systems work there,' says Mr
Gould.
'Officials from all over China go to Hainan for conferences or for holidays -it's a great shop window for us.'
Traffic control is a very competitive business and others are intent on
grabbing a slice of the Asian market. Siemens of Germany, GEC of Britain and
Philips in Australia are Peek's main business rivals.
Mr Gould spends his time in traffic jams watching the lights and calculating
business possibilities.
'We could be doing nearly Pounds 100m of business in China alone within
three years' he says. 'It will mean a big investment in terms of marketing
and technology transfer. But the rewards make the effort very worthwhile.'
