
Because many Hassidic Jews regard television as impious, they will not have
seen the play that has caused the controversy, Wall of Silence (BBC1,
Sunday).
Comedy writers Laurence Marks and Maurice Gran (both Jewish) set a murder
mystery in the strictly orthodox, mysterious Hassidic community in north
London, which sounded promising and was mysterious enough. But, by the end I
still had no idea how the estate-agent with the gentile wife in Bristol
fitted in, nor how the lady with a fractured skull underneath her
ultra-orthodox wig came to be sitting on a train.
The greater mystery was how such poppycock ever achieved the Screen One
slot. Marks and Gran's comedy background showed in wooden dialogue,
preposterous characters and huge sign-posts to tell viewers what is going to
happen next. The police chief agrees to lend his car to a colleague. 'Have
you seen the way he treats his car, gov?', cautions a minion. Surprise,
surprise: the hero, PC Mullens (Bill Paterson) writes it off in the next
scene.
The story starts when the corpse of a kosher butcher is pulled from a canal
in his Volvo, a swastika daubed on the bonnet. But this is no racial murder,
as PC Mullens realises when he is informed, implausibly late in the day,
that the corpse had been stabbed through the eyes.
Mullins duly expounds more customs of the Hassidim. The butcher must have
been a moyser, or informant, to have been killed by this grisly ritual. On
Radio 4's Sunday programme, orthodox Jews expressed fears (a touch
unrealistic to my mind) that viewers might link eye-stabbing to the ancient
libel about Jews ritually murdering Christian children and incite
antisemitism.
According to The Jewish Chronicle, the upshot was that PC Mullens's spiel
was altered to include the qualifying comments about eye-stabbing being
entirely alien to British Jewry. However, a closer look suggests that this
was a strangely grudging and partial appeasement.
The Encyclopaedia Judaica's discussion of legal penalties for moysers - the
source, I would guess, for Marks and Gran - gives no record of anyone ever
being treated thus, although some European rabbi seems to have favoured
mutilation as a lesser punishment than excommunication.
So why did Gran and Marks get it wrong? It is legitimate to write plays
about Hassidim or any other religious group. But the odder and more alien
the group appears to the rest of society, the more it behoves a playwright
to strive to be accurate.
Assignment: The Price of Gold (BBC 2, Tuesday) spelled out something I
should have known, the vital link between a decade of gold prospecting in
Brazil and the destruction of the rain forest. Julian Pettifer's interesting
report painted a vivid picture of the frontier mentality of Amazon mining
towns.
The gold prospectors are as one would expect - tough, uneducated men who
have little faith that they will make old bones. A bullet, a mining
accident, or malaria will probably get them first. Very low down their list
of anxieties, if anywhere at all, are the long-term health risks of using
mercury.
Mercury is banned, but it is used in large quantities. It is mixed with the
sludge dredged from the river because it bonds to the gold particles. Some
of this mercury is released into the river and a great deal more is burnt
off with blow-lamps. This vapor mixes with ash from burning the forests. The
result is high levels of mercury in the atmosphere above the Amazon and, in
some unspecified circumstances, methyl mercury forming in the rivers. This
deadly substance passes up the food chain and ends up in fish eaten by the
riverside dwellers.
How serious are the health-risks is as yet unclear. Scientists are keener to
analyse satellite data than to brave the Amazon to study its poisoned
inhabitants. However, experts spoke of a 'time-bomb' which will inevitably
go off, even if the gold-prospectors can be persuaded to burn off mercury in
retorts, which is cheaper as well as safe.
Minister for the Amazon and Environment, Mr Rubens Rimpero referred to
levels of metal mercury being higher than those in an industrial accident at
Minemata in Japan. Pettifer reminded us that fish contaminated with methyl
mercury caused 'hundreds' of deaths and led to 'thousands' of children being
born with disabilities. Momentarily, my willingness to follow Mr Pettifer
dipped. The consequences of Minemata must be known with more precision. Why
are documentary-makers so often cavalier with statistics?
The statistics of the Waco siege are clear enough; 84 corpses, 20 of them
children. Anything but clear, as we were reminded by Panorama; Sinful
Messiah (BBC 1, Monday) is whether the FBI were justified in mounting the
assault on the Branch Davidian headquarters. Fresh material given to
Panorama, a taped conversation between cult-leader David Koresh and his
lawyer late in the siege, suggests that Koresh did not want mass-suicide.
Koresh explained that he was delaying until he had finished writing the
revelations of the Twelfth Seal. This the FBI dismissed as mere bluff, so
Koresh's deadline was literally that. However, the first chapters of the
book were found on the word-processor. Which will be the lucky publisher who
lays hands on the Sinful Messiah's final revelations?
Timewatch; A Hidden History (BBC 2, 8.00) told the story of another kind of
deadly fanaticism which led ten Republicans to starve themselves to death in
the Maze Prison hunger strike of 1981. Survivors talked about the
experience, one of them describing the sensation as being like having one's
brain rubbed with a grater.
This well-researched documentary aired allegations that despite the Thatcher
government's claims not to have struck any deal with the Republican
prisoners, negotiations were conducted throughout the strike and concessions
were quietly made after it ended.
The programme's weakness was to have left the attitude of the Catholic
Church so unclear, especially as Maze chaplain Father Dennis Faul played a
prominent part in the drama and was interviewed at some length. What seemed
to emerge was that fasting in protest was permissible - indeed, as I recall,
St Patrick was said to have fasted against an uncooperative king.
However, the hierarchy's attitude to the hunger-strike changed when it was
deemed that the protestors intended to die. Once across this rather fine
line, they would presumably have committed suicide, a mortal sin for
Catholics. If this was indeed the case, the fact that papal emissaries
brought Bobby Sands a golden crucifix before he died needed some
explanation.
