
Leo Mullin, the 50-year-old Harvard-educated banker recently named as
president of First Chicago Corporation, has thus become heir-apparent to
First Chicago chairman Richard Thomas, the engineer of a remarkable
turnround over the past two years at the US's eleventh largest bank, writes
Laurie Morse.
Mullin's first task will be to convince Wall Street, and the ranks of First
Chicago's institutional bankers, that despite his history as a retail
banker, he will maintain the bank's successful balance of retail and global
corporate banking activities. First Chicago, after a decade of mishaps and
disappointing returns, is now profitable and poised for growth.
Mullin's promotion not only paves the way for an orderly succession to
Thomas, who must retire in 1996, but suggests that the bank plans to expand
through retail bank acquisitions. Mullin came to First Chicago 12 years ago
as a strategic planner and ended up directing the corporation's retail
banking activities.
He has plenty of experience of producing healthy businesses out of turnround
situations. He is credited with preserving First Chicago's credit card
portfolio in the early 1980s. A loss-maker at the time, the credit card
division is now one of the bank's biggest profit centres.
Before joining First Chicago, Mullin spent nine years at McKinsey, where he
helped forge Conrail out of a handful of failed eastern freight carriers.
Mullin claims he fully understands the bank's balance of business. 'My job
is to develop a strategy for the entire corporation,' he says. 'We have as
much upside in corporate banking as anywhere else.'
Still, he is keen to keep First Chicago a leader in its home market. Barely
a week after his promotion, First Chicago announced it would acquire Lake
Shore Bancorp, a local institution with Dollars 1.2bn in assets and
headquarters on Chicago's posh Michigan Avenue for Dollars 323m in stock.
First Chicago's share price fell after the deal, which analysts viewed as
pricy. However, Mullin says the purchase makes strategic sense and that
First Chicago should grow aggressively in all its divisions.
