
ON THE eve of President Bill Clinton's visit to Seoul, a senior South Korean
official said yesterday his country should ultimately be responsible for
solving North Korea's nuclear problem rather than the US.
'The denuclearisation (of the Korean peninsula) has to be realised through
dialogue and consultations between South and North Korea,' said Mr Han
Wan-sang, the national unification minister, in apparent response to
domestic criticism that Seoul is relying too much on Washington in trying to
halt North Korea's nuclear weapons programme.
The issue is expected to head the list of topics to be discussed between Mr
Clinton and South Korean President Kim Young-sam at the weekend.
The present crisis has set back hopes in Seoul that the problems of
denuclearisation and eventual unification might be solved between the two
Koreas without involving other regional powers, including the US, China,
Japan and Russia.
That has been considered a desirable goal from Seoul's perspective because
it would symbolise South Korea's autonomy in deciding its own fate after a
century of being dominated by outside powers.
Besides relying on the US to intercede directly with Pyongyang, Seoul could
see the issue slip further from its control if the UN Security Council
becomes involved, which might include imposing economic sanctions on North
Korea if it does not accept full IAEA inspections.
The Clinton visit, however, could counter criticism that Seoul is playing a
secondary role, as the US president will be seen consulting the South Korean
government on the nuclear issue.
In a face-saving gesture, Seoul is also proposing again that North-South
talks should be held in parallel with the negotiations between Pyongyang and
Washington. A previous attempt to stage inter-Korean talks on the nuclear
problem collapsed over procedural issues.
Mr Han emphasised the importance of Seoul's position as an intermediary
between the US and North Korea. 'If North Korea gives up nuclear development
and guarantees nuclear transparency, South Korea will be able to help North
Korea actively to improve relations with the US and Japan,' he explained.
