
REDUNDANCY is affecting more and more people, with a growing number of the
nation's 3m unemployed being former executives. And while it might seem
calamitous, financially it is one of the better ways to leave a job.
Resigning or taking early retirement mean losing out on many benefits.
Before redundancy
If you suspect you might be made redundant, there are several measures you
can take in advance.
Peter Smith, of financial adviser Hill Martin - which specialises in
retirement and redundancy planning - says: 'People think they have no
negotiating power. That is not quite right.
'When an employer is making someone redundant, they want them out of the
door as soon as possible and sometimes they say 'yes' to something just to
get rid of them.'
Start by taking out your contract of employment and check the terms and
conditions, particularly the length of notice to which you are entitled. You
will then be able to ensure that pay-off terms agree with the contract. If
you belong to a union, trade or professional body, see if it has any
guidelines or advice.
Jenny Woolf, author of Redundancy: Coping and Bouncing Back*, suggests
taking full advantage of facilities offered by the company while you are
still employed, such as a medical check-up. If you have redundancy cover for
mortgage payments, check its terms and conditions. These protection plans
are becoming increasingly expensive while offering poorer value (see page
VI).
Redundancy negotiations
Statutory redundancy pay is the legal minimum which an employer is obliged
to pay and it is calculated on your age and length of service subject to the
current maximum of Pounds 205 a week. You qualify for statutory redundancy
payments only if you have been in full-time work for two years, or in
part-time work for five.
But many employers offer an ex-gratia payment. As long as your total
redundancy pay does not exceed Pounds 30,000 and is not made as part of your
conditions of service, it is tax-free. Anything over Pounds 30,000 will be
taxed under the pay-as-you-earn system which can mean top-rate tax of 40 per
cent on the excess. It can therefore be to your advantage, particularly if
you are over 50, to ask your employer to make part of the payment into your
pension scheme.
Hill Martin's Smith says this has to be done before you leave and Harold
Roberts, of Towry Law, a financial adviser which has produced a free guide
to redundancy*, warns that care must be taken not to exceed Inland Revenue
limits.
Remember that you are likely to be entitled to a tax rebate for the year in
which you were made redundant, since you will be taxed on the assumption
that you were working for the full tax year.
If, however, your termination date is near the end of the tax year, Smith
suggests asking your employer if it could fall into the next one. Your
income for the new financial year is likely to be lower than the previous
year, so you could be taxed at the lower rate on any excess over Pounds
30,000.
Smith also says that if you have ever worked overseas for your employer,
extra tax exemption could apply. You should seek professional advice in this
complicated area.
You might be asked to accept pay in lieu of notice, which would have the
added benefit of being tax-free. But Woolf warns that if you have redundancy
insurance, it might not pay out until the termination date. The same is
usually true of state benefits.
Make sure your employer pays for holiday entitlements which you have not
taken, and ask him to allow you to go for job interviews during paid hours.
Look at the perks which the company gives you and see if any can be
extended. Life assurance and medical insurance cease when you leave
employment, but Roberts says some employers may be prepared to maintain
policies for up to six months after redundancy.
Smith advises asking if the company carries a continuation option without
requiring a further health check. Try to see if you can continue medical
expenses insurance at a discount and without having to declare existing
health defects.
Trying to keep hold of the company car could be more difficult because of
its insurance. 'Many companies provide the company car for the period of
notice or provide a hire car at their expense,' said Roberts.
Some employers will pay for financial counselling and outplacement services
but, if not, ask for it. Finally, get your employer to put your redundancy
terms down on paper.
Once you leave
Unemployment benefit: If you have been a well-paid professional, you will
probably feel uncomfortable signing on but, as long as you have paid the
required National Insurance contributions and are seeking work actively, it
is yours by right.
One advantage - even if the present rate of Pounds 43.10 a week for those
under 65, plus Pounds 25.55 for adult dependents, is not too attractive - is
that NICs will be credited to you automatically, so you will not lose your
state retirement entitlement. Roger Taylor, of the Consumers' Association,
warns not to expect unemployment benefit immediately.
'Your entitlement will be affected by statutory redundancy payments, wages
due, holiday pay, refund of pension scheme contributions, and payments due
from your employer before you were made redundant,' he says. 'Any payments
above and beyond these are treated as payments in lieu. Work out how many
weeks' pay this is equivalent to. You will not be able to claim unemployment
benefit until this time is up.'
Claims cannot usually be backdated, which is another reason for signing on
as soon as possible. The benefit lasts for one year. If you have health
problems, Smith advises signing on for sickness benefit instead, since it is
non-taxable and payable as long as you are ill.
You might qualify for income support to help with mortgage interest
payments, ground rent and other housing costs if your total capital is less
than Pounds 8,000 (including capital held abroad). But if you have been made
redundant recently, you will probably have too much capital.
'If you dispose of the capital, you will not be entitled to benefit if the
DSS considers you deliberately got rid of the capital to qualify for income
support,' says Taylor. 'Paying off your mortgage might also count as getting
rid of capital.'
You should also tell your local authority, as you could be entitled to a
lower community charge. Roberts says that if your children are in higher
education, the local authority grant will be reviewed.
Finally, if you have a mortgage, contact your building society and your bank
manager to let them know what has happened. 'Many building societies have
special schemes to help the unemployed and the same applies to your bank,'
says Roberts.
* Redundancy: Coping and Bouncing Back, by Jenny Woolf, Piccadilly Press,
Pounds 6.99; Redundancy and Personal Finances, Towry Law, 57 High Street,
Windsor, Berkshire, SL4 1LX, free.
The Department of Employment runs a free help-line on statutory redundancy
payments: 0800-848 489.
Next week: Money management.
