
Steven Spielberg describes his latest blockbuster film Jurassic Park, which
opened in the US last night, as 'not science fiction but science
eventuality'. The Hollywood publicity machine has made sure that most
Americans already know its plot: scientists use genetic engineering to
create a theme park with real dinosaurs which then run amok.
This week - with a sense of timing that the best Hollywood hype merchant
could not have matched - the venerable British research journal Nature
published evidence suggesting that the movie is slightly less far-fetched
than it may sound. A Californian research group including Dr George Poinar,
a scientific adviser to Jurassic Park, has extracted the first samples of
genetic material (DNA) from the dinosaur era.
Admittedly, the 120m-year-old DNA came from an extinct weevil rather than a
dinosaur. And the Californian scientists isolated just fragments of two
genes rather than the 100,000 or so complete genes that would provide full
instructions for anyone wanting to recreate the insect.
But they have demonstrated two propositions that would have seemed wildly
speculative less than 10 years ago. First, the DNA molecule is robust enough
to survive for millions of years under the right conditions. Second,
scientists can fish out microscopic quantities of DNA and then make billions
of copies for analysis (using gene-amplifying technology called polymerase
chain reaction).
The link between Jurassic Park and the Poinar group's real-life discovery is
amber, fossilised tree resin which has unique sealing and antiseptic
properties. It is a honey-coloured time capsule, transporting trapped
insects virtually intact from prehistoric forest to laboratory bench.
The Californian scientists worked on a tree-feeding weevil preserved in
amber from Jezzine, Lebanon. Michael Crichton, who wrote the novel, Jurassic
Park, imagined extracting DNA from blood in the gut of a mosquito that had
fed on a dinosaur just before it was trapped in the resin.
Unfortunately for the story, the vast majority of insects in amber are
species that live or feed on trees, such as weevils, termites, ants and
bees. Only a handful of specimens of blood-sucking insects are known from
the dinosaur era (older than 65m years) - and scientists will be
fantastically lucky if they contain dinosaur DNA that had not been broken
down by digestive juices.
The greatest possible piece of luck would be to find a recently hatched baby
dinosaur in amber - extremely unlikely but not out of the question. After
all, lizards and frogs have been preserved in 40m-year-old amber from the
Dominican Republic.
However, amber is not the only potential source of dinosaur DNA. In
exceptional cases, the molecules may be robust enough to survive inside
dinosaur fossils. Professor Jack Horner of Montana State University is
attempting to find genetic material in bones of the ferocious Tyrannosaurus
rex, which have been preserved in extremely dry sandstone beds.
Even if scientists do manage to extract dinosaur DNA from any source, it is
hard to see how this could include the whole genome - the blueprint that
would be the first requirement for resurrecting dinosaurs.
For the foreseeable future, any mad billionaire who really wants to create a
Jurassic Park would do better to forget genes and build on the technique Mr
Spielberg used for his movie: computer-controlled robotic dinosaurs. Over
the next decade or two, artificial intelligence and bio-materials
engineering will advance to the point at which it would be possible to
create a lifelike Tyrannosaurus rex that behaved with terrifying
unpredictability.
For the palaeogeneticist studying ancient DNA, the ultimate objective is not
to recreate any species - insect or dinosaur. The point is first to track
evolution at the molecular level by following genetic changes over millions
of years. The research may also reveal facts about an extinct creature and
its lifestyle that are impossible to discover from conventional fossils.
Knowledge of a few intact genes from dinosaurs could answer many
controversial questions about their evolution and relationship to today's
reptiles, birds and mammals. And discovering a gene for a digestive enzyme,
for example, would be a strong clue about what a particular dinosaur ate.
Although recreating a whole dinosaur is out of the question, anyone who
isolated an individual gene would find it relatively easy to insert this
into today's living creatures, employing methods already used routinely to
transfer genes between species. Human genes, for instance, have been
inserted into sheep, so that the human proteins required for medical
purposes can be extracted from the animals' milk.
If scientists managed to isolate one dinosaur gene and insert it into a
crocodile embryo, the creature would still grow up looking and behaving like
a croc because its development would be controlled by thousands of its own
genes. But it might produce some dinosaur protein.
An enterprising company could make a fortune breeding and promoting the
resulting crocodiles, even if just a millionth of their genetic material
came from a dinosaur. Imagine Florida restaurants serving crocodine steaks
or Tokyo department stores selling dinocroc shoes and handbags.
Biotechnologists, who are already nervous about the likely impact of
Jurassic Park on public attitudes to genetic engineering, dislike such
speculation. But it is a plausible scenario 20 years from now. Mr
Spielberg's eventuality is unlikely to come to pass for 100 years, if at
all.
