
WHIRLPOOL, the world's largest white goods manufacturer, said yesterday it
was setting up an Asian headquarters in Singapore to expand its presence in
the sector's fastest growing region.
The move is important for Michigan-based Whirlpool's strategy to become the
first global player in the white goods industry.
'With our position in the US, Europe and Latin America, two-thirds of our
strategy is in place. Asia is the one missing ingredient,' said Mr David
Whitwam, chairman and chief executive, at the Domotechnica appliances fair
in Cologne.
Whirlpool has subsidiaries in several Asian countries: an office in Hong
Kong that is developing its Chinese strategy and a manufacturing joint
venture in India.
It is the largest western player in an Asian white goods market dominated by
Japanese and Korean suppliers, but still has a market share of only 1 per
cent, said Mr Whitwam.
He predicted that within two years the Asian market for white goods would be
bigger than either western Europe or the US - where units sales were 42m and
40m respectively last year for the seven main types of large appliance.
Unit sales in Asia would grow by an average 6 per cent to 8 per cent a year
over the next few years, compared with an average 2 per cent to 3 per cent
in Europe and the US, he said.
The Singapore office would pave the way for a change in Whirlpool's
procurement strategy for Asia.
It imports white goods from Europe and the US, or purchases them from local
suppliers.
The new office will include product development staff who will design white
goods for Asia's many different markets, and manufacturing experts.
Mr Whitwam said Whirlpool would evolve towards expanding its manufacturing
in Asia through wholly-owned subsidiaries, alliances and joint ventures.
Whirlpool sells both upmarket Bauknecht machines and value-for-money Roper
products in Asia, which offered 'a broad array of opportunities', said Mr
Whitwam.
Whirlpool's brand strategy may not yet be as clearly defined in Asia as in
Europe or the US, he said, but the Whirlpool mid-market brand would be the
cornerstone.
