
TALKS on rescuing the proposed regional jet joint venture between British
Aerospace and Taiwan Aerospace Corporation (TAC) yesterday splintered into a
series of meetings largely among Taiwanese officials over the details of a
draft deal.
Mr Denny Ko, TAC's president, was hopeful of agreement on the financial
structure 'within 24 hours'.
A team led by Mr John Cahill, BAe's chairman, has been in talks with
Taiwanese bankers, politicians and industrialists since Monday.
The joint venture, Avro, is central to his strategy to improve BAe's
profitability. The RJ series of regional jets that it would build partly in
Taiwan currently loses money.
A contract establishing the joint venture was signed last January, but
Taiwanese banks lending money to Avro expressed fears last month that it was
too risky.
The latest round of talks involved lawyers, the state-owned Chiao Tung Bank,
which leads the consortium of lender banks, the Ministry of Economic
Affairs, Taiwan's industry ministry, and other government departments.
Mr Ko also held meetings with Taiwan's defence ministry to discuss what part
of the RJ programme could be most easily transferred to Taiwan.
The defence ministry's Aero Industry Development Centre (AIDC) would be
involved in RJ assembly and the development of any new aircraft, called the
RJ-X.
Major General Shin You-kwon, who heads the assembly of Taiwan's
home-produced supersonic fighter aircraft, stressed the significance of
winning RJ-X work.
'This project would bring real benefit in learning design and manufacture
(of civil aircraft),' he said.
Taiwan has a well-developed military aerospace industry. More than 200
companies supply components to the AIDC. But the government halved its order
for the supersonic fighter aircraft after it agreed last year to buy US and
French fighters from General Dynamics and Dassault.
The government now wants to encourage the aerospace industry to diversify
away from the defence sector.
It plans to turn AIDC into a semi-autonomous state company next July and
privatise it towards the end of the decade.
