
Only when the Genevan dust has settled, and the details of the Uruguay Round
agreement are finally available, will developing countries be able to assess
whether they have granted more trade concessions, on the Gatt's conventional
mercantilist calculus, than they have gained in return.
Late last month, the Gatt secretariat produced a report, which appeared to
suggest that developing countries had made substantially greater trade
concessions than their developed country partners. But trade sources in
Geneva report, however, that new tariff reduction offers were arriving right
up to the Round deadline and that the final outcome is likely to be
significantly more liberal.
Mr Balkrishan Zutshi, India's ambassador to the Gatt, is less sure. He
certainly believes that his country has given more than it got. He says that
India has cut its average trade-weighted tariff for non-consumer industrial
goods by 55 per cent, albeit from a high base, while the European Union cut
its average tariff to India by 22 per cent and the US by 18 per cent.
'As far as market access is concerned, there is a feeling that developing
countries have put in more than they've got in return,' he says.
In New Delhi, Indian deputies paralysed parliament yesterday in protest over
New Delhi's endorsement of the trade deal but agreed that there was little
they could do to reverse the decision.
The ambassador's sentiment seems to be borne out by early Gatt estimates.
Using figures based on offers made up to November 19, the secretariat
estimates that the percentage of developing country industrial exports now
subject to tariff bindings has risen from 21 per cent to 65 per cent, while
agricultural tariff binding has risen even more dramatically from 17 per
cent to 89 per cent as a result of the Round. Developed country binding
percentages remain higher but the increases are much less dramatic.
In return, developing countries appear to have got less in return than
richer countries from developed country liberalisation. The average
trade-weighted tariff on industrial imports to developed countries has
fallen, based on provisional Gatt figures, by 38 per cent as a result of the
deal. But average tariffs on imports from developing countries have fallen
32 per cent while the tariff on least-developed country imports has fallen
by just 19 per cent and remains some two-thirds higher than that on
developed country imports.
One reason for these rather dramatic figures, Gatt officials explain, is
developed country barriers to textile trade embodied in the Multi-Fibre
Arrangement, now due to be phased out over the next ten years. When the
effective tariff rates implied by MFA quotas are included, or textile and
fish imports excluded, the picture for developing countries looks
considerably better.
Moreover, Gatt officials point out, simple comparisons of tariff cuts fail
to appreciate the benefits to developing countries of the accord: the
strengthening of the rules-based world trading regime and the domestic gains
from cutting national trade barriers. A recent OECD study of the welfare
effects of liberalisation estimates non-OECD countries would gain Dollars
29.9m if OECD countries alone cut their trade barriers, but Dollars 86.4bn
if non-OECD countries also liberalise.
Indeed, the most dramatic change during the Uruguay Round has been the
switch in the attitude of developing countries, including India, from
opposing reductions in trade barriers to unilaterally cutting their own
tariff barriers in order to foster export-led growth. Ironically, it has
been developed countries which have dragged their feet over making the
concessions necessary to reach agreement.
'Back in 1986 we had two superpowers, the Berlin wall, developing counties
had not embraced the process of autonomous liberalisation and industrialised
countries were not in recession,' says Mr Balkrishan Zutshi. 'The Uruguay
Round has been completed in a very different world.'
