
International electronic mail systems are no longer the plaything of hackers
and bug-eyed computer enthusiasts. They are emerging as credible business
tools that enable individuals and companies to communicate cheaply and
efficiently around the globe.
Like the in-house electronic mail networks that have become a fact of
business life in many companies, these systems provide a means of sending
and receiving messages via personal computers or computer terminals. With
global electronic mail services, however, messages can be sent across the
world or across town.
For evidence of the rising popularity of electronic mail, a look at the
business cards collected from clients or contacts lately should be enough.
The chances are that some of them include electronic mail 'addresses', along
with telephone and facsimile numbers.
The advantages of electronic mail are numerous. It can eliminate hours of
frustrating 'telephone tag' and enable people to communicate across
timezones with ease. It also sidesteps busy facsimile machines that spew out
piles of paper which are often misplaced or misdirected. With electronic
mail, the message appears directly upon the computer screen on the desk of
the individual being contacted.
The biggest roadblock to the success of electronic mail in the past has been
the lack of a 'critical mass' of users. Although dozens of personal computer
electronic mail services are available, until recently they were not linked.
This meant that to reach somebody it was necessary to subscribe to the same
electronic messaging system.
Over the past couple of years, however, many electronic mail systems have
started 'talking' to one another. The mechanism for this is 'Internet' - a
low-cost and efficient link between electronic mail services worldwide. The
Internet links an estimated 1.5m computers over 10,000 networks in 50
countries, serving about 6m users.
Internet enthusiast Brendan P Kehoe - whose popular guide to using the
Internet, 'Zen and the Art of the Internet' (Prentice-Hall), is a
'must-read' for all new users - describes the Internet as a large 'network
of networks'. He points out that there is no single network. 'Regional
networks like SuraNet, PrepNet and NearNet are all inter-connected or
inter-networked together,' he says. 'And all this activity takes place in
real-time.'
The Internet resembles a computer network co-operative. There is no central
authority that oversees it and rules are largely informal. Its roots lie in
a US Defence Department project begun in the early 1970s to enable US
universities, national laboratories and government agencies to share
information.
Over the past 20 years it has mushroomed to include regional, corporate and
public networks, including commercial electronic mail systems. 'People
conduct their love life over the Internet, their hobbies and their
interests. They argue politics and engage in all kinds of business,' says
Mitch Kapor, co-founder of the Electronic Frontier Foundation in Cambridge,
Massachusetts, which promotes awareness of the on-line world.
'Internet is doubling annually in users, networks, computers and traffic,'
says Vinton Cerf, president of the Internet Society, a volunteer secretariat
that helps administer the network. 'It is growing faster than any other
telecommunications systems ever built, including the telephone network.'
Commercial users now outnumber academic and government Internet users and by
1998, Cerf predicts, the system will serve over 100m users.
Despite the anarchic nature of its structure, the basics of using Internet
communications are simple. All that is needed is a computer modem, a
communications software package and a subscription to an on-line information
service linked to the Internet. Public access to the Internet is provided by
popular services such as Compuserve, MCI mail and Applelink.
Subscription costs range from about Dollars 9 (Pounds 5.80) to Dollars 20
per month, depending upon the service and varying according to the
information services offered. Once a subscription to one of these services
is obtained, the charge for sending an electronic messages is generally only
a few pennies, depending upon the message length and the time it takes to
transmit. In most places a local telephone call will connect you to the
system.
A subscription to Compuserve, one of the most widely used on-line
information services, costs Dollars 8.95 per month. Compuserve users simply
dial a local access number with the modem, log on and type GO MAIL to enter
the message system. The charge for reading or sending Internet messages is
15 cents for the first 7.5KBytes (about 900 words) and 5 cents per
additional 2.5KBytes (about 300 words) after that.
The key to sending an Internet message lies in the Internet address. A
typical Internet address might be: jsmith@cix. compulink. co. uk. The
elements of the address are not particularly cryptic - the name of the
recipient is J Smith and he is a subscriber at (or @) CIX, the full name of
which is Compulink. The last two designations show that Compulink is a
company, rather than an educational establishment or government agency, that
resides in the UK.
One drawback is that it is not always easy to find Internet addresses.
Although some systems offer international directories of their electronic
mail users, there is no central directory. Critics say the Internet,
originally designed for use in scientific and education applications, does
not have security and ease-of-use features that commercial users want. At
peak business hours, promptness of service on the Internet can also be a
problem.
Despite its limitations, the Internet is an inexpensive way of sending and
receiving electronic messages. Doing business without access to such
electronic mail systems is soon likely to be as rare as the office without a
telephone.
