
Recession has at last caught up with Germany and its property markets, but
the effects are likely to be more subdued that in other leading
industrialised countries.
The recession has hit the Frankfurt office market hard - rents are down by
as much as 25 per cent on commercial property over the past 18 months and a
large amount of new office space is about to come on the markets as projects
initiated during better times come to fruition. Because there is already
overcapacity in the market, this is likely to put further pressure on rents.
Frankfurt rents increased by 15-25 per cent annually over the five years to
1991 and in 1991 letting reached a record level of 322,000 sq m. Vacancy
rates have risen to 7-8 per cent of the total supply. But several new
buildings, predominantly in the central financial district, are about to
come on stream and have not been fully let.
Like the country itself, the German property market is highly regionalised -
and is now divided sharply between west and east.
There are several large cities in the west which sustain important markets
of their own, including Dusseldorf, Munich, Hamburg, Cologne and Stuttgart.
While the Frankfurt market is driven by international investors and
international organisations - predominantly in financial services which
therefore makes it particularly vulnerable to the downturn - local factors
are more important for the other cities.
Despite the undoubted severity of western Germany's slowdown, it is from a
very high base and local property markets are bearing up or better -
predominantly because of a shortage of supply. While prime office rents
dropped by 21 per cent in Frankfurt in the year to December 1992, they had
climbed by 7 per cent in Hamburg, nearly 8 per cent in Munich, 16 per cent
in Dusseldorf and 25 per cent in Stuttgart.
It is unlikely that rents will hold this year as Germany experiences what
according to some economists will be its worst downturn since the Second
World War. But the environment is in general more stable than in other
countries. Germans are by nature more conservative than property speculators
elsewhere in the world - and German banks are more cautious lenders. A
relatively restrictive planning environment is another factor encouraging
cautious optimism about the future.
In the eastern part of Germany, a wholly different set of conditions apply.
The new Lander have to be completely rebuilt and there are enormous fortunes
to be made by those willing to take risks on the future development of
Berlin - with 3.4m inhabitants Germany's largest city and the future seat of
government - and cities such as Leipzig and Dresden.
The risks are as enormous as the opportunities at this stage: most
fundamentally it is not clear how much time it will take for a
self-sustaining economic revival to get underway in the east. At a more
nuts-and-bolts level, there are practical uncertainties - over rights to
land ownership, over planning rules, over liability for pollution and
contamination.
The Berlin market reflects some of the uncertainties. Zadelhoff Deutschland
calculates that before reunification the demand for office space ran at
50,000 sq m a year. Now, Zadelhoff says, the current vacancy rate is
virtually nil and unsatisfied demand stands at about 500,000 sq m. But there
is so much building activity going on at present that Zadelhoff predicts
that there may well be significant oversupply in the market by 1995-96.
Meanwhile, rents have gone from DM15-DM30 a sq m at the time of
reunification, to a peak of DM110 and back down to DM40-DM50 at present  -
without anything new being built or let.
In Dresden and Leipzig, the current supply of office space meets far less
than half of projected demand by the mid-1990s in both cases. Realignment of
supply and demand is not likely to take place until much later but initially
speculative rents are already starting to fall.
