
This month the South Bank takes another musical stride 'Towards the
Millennium', in seven-league boots cobbled by Nicholas Snowman, Simon Rattle
and the late Michael Vyner. As you may remember, their plan for the decade
is to have an annual survey of all the decades of our century, one by one.
It will culminate in 2000 AD with music of the 1990s; this year is the turn
of the 1920s, to which several concerts are devoted.
On Wednesday, Rattle and his City of Birmingham Symphony led off with
middle-period Varese, late-middle Berg (the 1924 Wozzeck Suite) and
Gershwin, and early Shostakovich - all quite disparate. Though it was a
pretty idea to set the Varese Ameriques (1921), his first New York piece,
against An American in Paris (1928), those works passed each other by like
ships in the night; and the precocious Soviet composer and the decadent
Schoenberg pupil were locked into their own musical cultures.
Yes, Mahler was to be a common factor; but Shostakovich began to appreciate
his music only two years after his own First Symphony (1925), at about the
time when he was hearing Wozzeck appreciatively in Leningrad. In Rattle's
hands the Shostakovich First revealed few signs of latent Mahlerianism.
There really is a kinship of pawky irony to be found in the opening
Allegretto - not, however, at Rattle's indifferently hasty tempo, which left
the most characteristic ideas either over-emphatic or just under-pointed.
Far more sympathy was lavished upon the Wozzeck fragments: many poignant,
beautifully wrought details, though the soprano Elise Ross brought only a
concert-singer's careful address to Marie's solos, with no raw drama
incarnated in the voice. Rattle sounded still more engaged by the broad
hit-or-miss expanse of Ameriques, with its full, outre orchestral complement
to knock us over. Then, in properly disarming fashion, Gershwin's American
tourist crashed in, strutted, flirted brashly and won all hearts.
On Monday at the Barbican, the Ukrainian conductor Fedor Glushchenko had
taken the English Chamber Orchestra through a not dissimilar programme, of a
later date but tamer airs. Arvo Part's early 'Cantus in Memory of Benjamin
Britten' unwound, in accordance with its minimalist formula, to moderately
gripping effect; with more deliberate precision, it can seem more magically
suspended and luminous than that. Equally, Tchaikovsky's Mozartiana
transcriptions would have gained by some wry detachment, though the clarinet
and violin cadenzas were vividly projected.
As soloist in Shostakovich's First Cello Concerto (1959), Rafael Wallfisch
was gracefully eloquent - the orchestral accompaniment was too reticent to
prompt him toward any more candid display of feeling. He still managed to do
impressive justice to his grand cadenza-movement. And for the first 'public'
performance of David Matthews' Romanza op. 49, commissioned for the Queen
Mother's 90th birthday and duly performed at Buckingham Palace by
Rostropovich in August 1990, Wallfisch responded perfectly to the manner of
the score. More than any David Matthews' score until his very latest ones,
Romanza has an audibly contemporary basis: not mere nostalgia for the
gestures of between-the-wars British music, but loyal affection for them
refracted from a candid, irrevocable distance. To hear Matthews admit to
being a modern composer, perhaps against his natural bent, was a real
satisfaction. For him like the rest of us, it is too late for naive returns
to past modes; but it is possible to revive them in knowing inverted-commas.
