
THE GOVERNMENT'S private finance initiative could transform the way in which
important capital projects are carried out in the UK, Mr Norman Lamont told
a conference organised by the Confederation of British Industry yesterday.
If true, this would not be before time. The comments of Mr Francois
Mitterrand on the contrast between the two rail links to the Channel tunnel
have merely reminded the public how urgently this transformation is needed.
The new rules, announced in last year's Autumn Statement, overturned the
Treasury's longstanding view that the private sector should not undertake
anything the public sector could, in principle, do more cheaply. Any project
can now go ahead, provided government contributions give value for money to
the taxpayer, private participation in joint ventures is usually decided on
the basis of competition, and substantial risk is assumed by the private
sector.
The government is looking for three kinds of private involvement in
infrastructure: development and implementation of projects in the private
sector; greater use of operating leases, in which the private lessor retains
some responsibility for managing the asset; and joint ventures between the
private and public sectors, such as London's Crossrail.
There are two reasons for wanting private involvement in infrastructure. The
silly reason is to evade constraints imposed by limits on public borrowing.
The sensible one is to improve efficiency.
Private finance is not, insists the chancellor, about evading public
expenditure controls. He protests too much. One reason for the initiative is
indeed to evade such arbitrary constraints. The problem is not simply the
Treasury's past unwillingness to distinguish capital from current spending.
It is the failure to go beyond annual cash-flow accounting. What is needed
is a public sector balance sheet, in which increases in assets can be set
against liabilities.
The chief justification for greater private sector involvement is, however,
in Mr Lamont's words, to harness 'private sector skills - in design, in
construction and, above all, in management'. This is to be distinguished
from pricing. Charging users does not entail private ownership and private
ownership does not entail charging individual users.
What is essential is private sector risk-taking. Otherwise, hopes for
greater financial discipline will be disappointed. The government must not
only state that financial failure will lead to liquidation, but stick to
that hard line in practice.
The government's initiative for private finance is to be welcomed, mainly
because it may lead to better projects, though private participants must
face risks if this is to happen.
Subject to that proviso, Howard Davies, director-general of the CBI, was
right to tell the government to get a move on. The new ideas can be
beneficial, but not if they are stuck in the Treasury's pending tray.
