
Seldom does a film festival act as midwife to an entire new sub-genre. But
at Berlin a newcomer screamed into the daylight while critics gasped,
onlookers applauded and everyone tried to determine whether it was a boy or
a girl. Eventually they blithely shrugged and christened it the Gay With A
Hint Of Straight Movie.
In each of three high-profile festival films - Japan's Okoge, France's Les
Nuits Fauves and Taiwan's Golden Bear-winning The Wedding Banquet - a gay
relationship is broken into by a heterosexual one, real or token, and the
world has a brief, startling glimpse of non-sectarian sexuality.
Cyril Collard's Les Nuits Fauves is the most untamed of the films. The 'wild
nights' are enjoyed by Collard himself as the thirtyish hero, an
HIV-positive film-maker swinging between a teenage girl and a young
sportsman. Unprotected sex abounds: the director all but invites you to hiss
as his (anti)hero hops from bed to bed, with time off for grope sessions in
a gay cruising ground by the Seine. And unprotected aesthetics are also
favoured. No genteel, cellophaned visuals here, as the handheld camera
shudders from quarrel to punch-up to romance and back again.
At best the film is vividly personal, like animated pages torn from a diary.
At worst it can seem like a long session of anarcho-narcissism, with a
tacked-on moralistic ending as specious as a deathbed repentance. Either
way, everyone talked and quarrelled about the film: which is exactly how
life at a festival should be.
Pick of the Far East's two AC/DC entries was Ang Lee's The Wedding Banquet.
Where Takehiro Nakejima's Okoge is a pleasant but puzzling comedy about a
girl's friendship with two gay lovers - just why, we wonder, is she so
besotted with them that she trails round Tokyo in their wake, lends them her
spare bedroom, purrs at the sound of homo-erotic bliss through the
rice-paper walls? - Lee's film takes a similar plot and turns it into a
crowd-pleaser that also makes dramatic and psychological sense.
The hero (Winston Chao), a Taiwanese yuppie in New York, devotes half his
emotional energies to living with his gay American lover (Mitchell
Lichtenstein of Streamers), the other half to parrying parental postcards
urging marriage. One day Ma and Pa turn up for a two-week visit. Stashing
away the gay calendars and muscle magazines, the lovers masquerade as
flatmates. Then a Taiwanese girl painter who wants a 'green card' to stay in
America is roped in as bride for a let's-make-the-folks-happy wedding.
There are loud laughs in this comedy with sentimental trimmings. But for a
two-hour chunk of 'feelgood' cinema, it also succeeds in avoiding false
notes. When the lies and masquerades come unstuck, the story totters towards
human disaster: only to right itself by going deeper into the characters
rather than blanding them out for a happy ending.
The Wedding Banquet shared an all-Eastern Golden Bear with The Lake Of
Scented Souls, reviewed by me last week. Justice was done. Nothing else in
the Berlin Competition sent one out glowing like these two films. Indeed
much moviegoing was like dancing over hot coals: as you avoided one clinker,
another lay in awful wait. You winced as you stepped on Holland's The
Homecoming, a darkly ludicrous murder film shot as if by the light of a
single candle. Then you scraped your sole painfully on Nordic angst in
Norway's The Telegraphist or Denmark/Sweden's Heartache.
Outside the competition life was more dependable. There was a cluster of
good retrospectives (CinemaScope, Billy Wilder, Gregory Peck); there were Mr
Wilder and Mr Peck themselves on show; and there was King Kong growling away
atop the festival theatre.
Oh, and there was one final interesting oddity in the competition. It was
Andrew Birkin's The Cement Garden. Ian McEwan's novel about incest,
gardening and unusual burial procedures (look for Mum inside the metal
locker filled with cement) is filmed in a grey, toneless, but oddly
bewitching sfumato as if through clouds of opium smoke. Since the film was
co-produced by France and Germany, there are incongruous Euro-actors:
notably Charlotte Gainsbourg, Birkin's niece, as the daughter. But someone
has done a fine dubbing job. They all sound as if they come the grungier
reaches of British suburbia, and an initially unpromising film ends up
holding you in sickly, sepulchral thrall.
