
Sir, Having injured Manchester by withdrawing the assisted area status so
vital for gaining investment, Tim Sainsbury, the industry minister, has
added insult by suggesting to the Association of Metropolitan Authorities
that cities should stop promoting themselves abroad. He wants them to
subjugate themselves to regional development organisations.
He wrote to the association on July 19, saying: 'It is far better for local
interests to concentrate on getting the product right, by the provision of
suitable sites and infrastructure, so that they can convert investor
inquiries into local success, and to contribute to the overall regional
message put out by the RDO.'
This would be an outrageous limitation, particularly when the government's
inward investment campaign is under fire for stressing Britain's low wages
rather than the positive advantages of our main cities.
Most of Manchester's foreign investment flows from local strengths and local
enterprise. US cinema giant UCI, for example, has taken office space in
Manchester because of the city's airport link to Los Angeles. And no doubt
cities such as Liverpool and Birmingham could cite similar cases.
Meanwhile, the Department of Trade and Industry's Invest in Britain Bureau
is not bringing home much bacon. Not one of the hundreds of cases handled by
the bureau last year resulted directly in a company coming to Manchester.
Mancester City Council runs its own Manchester Campaign with Manchester
Airport and the Central Manchester Development Corporation, and its business
promotion brochure has already sparked investment interest in Japan, the US
and Europe. These same investors find it bizarre that the government's
promotion machine has nothing to say about Manchester.
Britain's great cities need to advertise their strengths abroad. And until
the government understands the importance of these cities to the nation's
economy, that economy will remain weak. As weak as Mr Sainsbury's ideas on
the subject.
Graham Stringer,
leader of the city council,
Town Hall,
Manchester M60 2LA
