
THE TAJ Mahal is in the final stages of a clean-up. When workmen have
finished scrubbing its marble dome early next month, visitors will see 'a
shining new face of the Taj,' says Mr Ghulam Nabi Azad, the minister for
tourism and civil aviation.
The ministry is so convinced that the Taj will look even more special than
before that it is raising the entry fee from Rs2 to Rs10. Also, for the
first time in many years, officials will open the monument in the evenings
so that visitors can once again see the sight which sent Mughal poets into
raptures - the white dome of the Taj bathed in moonlight.
Unfortunately, it will take a lot more than renovating the Taj to improve
the image of Indian tourism. Even though the country has enough attractions
to fill a continent, it is finding it difficult to lure visitors to India.
Tour operators are reeling from the combined impact of last year's
inter-religious riots, bomb blasts, and air crashes, as well as the
persistent bad effects of repeated airline strikes, bureaucratic delays and
poor service. Non-resident Indians are still coming to India and so are
backpackers. But the big-spending western travellers are not coming in the
numbers that India had hoped.
Last winter's unrest came too late for many visitors to cancel their travel
plans and the number of tourists rose by a hefty 28 per cent to 1.87m. But
this year's figure may show no increase at all because would-be visitors
have time to seek alternative destinations.
Mr OP Ahuja, an executive committee member of the Indian Association of Tour
Operators, says that about 10 of the 14 US tour operators active in India
have this year cancelled programmes. Thomson, the UK's largest travel
company, and Nippon Travel Bureau, the biggest operator in Japan, have both
cut back. 'I am not very optimistic about this year,' says Mr Ahuja.
There is little the Indian tourism industry can do about riots and bomb
blasts, except wait for potential travellers to forget about them. However,
much of the malaise in Indian tourism - such as the persistent airline
strikes - is of the industry's own making. If the sights of India are
unforgettable, so, sometimes, are the frustrations involved in trying to see
them.
India is a developing country with many needs more pressing than keeping
tourists happy. Western tourists coming to India cannot expect the same
levels of comfort and efficiency as in their developed states. Also much of
India's great charm lies in its otherworldly atmosphere. Its villages and
temples are often suffused with a gentleness quite remote from modern life.
Even its cities hide corners of tranquillity, such as the tombs of the Lodi
kings in Lodi Gardens in Delhi. However, other developing countries -
notably Egypt - have managed to promote tourism despite their political and
economic difficulties.
India's most serious problem is domestic transport. Indian Airlines, the
main state-owned domestic carrier, has a poor reputation for service. In the
last two winters it has also been hit by long pilots' strikes which spoiled
many a holidaymaker's visit. An elderly German woman travelling through
Bombay last year was almost in tears after spending 40 hours on trains
covering the ground she had expected to cover by air. 'The other 19 people
in my group cancelled when they heard about the strikes. I should have
cancelled too,' she said.
Service on Indian Airlines is improving rapidly in response to competition
from newly-launched private airlines, which have captured about 20 per cent
of the market. But labour relations remain tense - not least because Indian
Airlines pilots are demanding that their pay and conditions stay on a par
with the private companies' pilots. It would be rash to bet on a strike-free
1993-94.
As far as hotels are concerned, India's luxury chains - including the Taj,
Oberoi and ITC groups - are generally on a par with their counterparts
elsewhere in Asia. However, except in Goa, a long-established tourist
centre, India lacks reliable networks of tourist-class hotels. Too often the
foreign visitor is faced with a choice of paying over Dollars 100 a night or
less than Dollars 10 - with nothing in between.
Even the luxury chains have little control over the management of tourist
sites - museums and wildlife parks, etc - which is mostly in the hands of
the central and state governments. At their best, these can be effective,
such as the organisation of a son et lumiere show at Delhi's Red Fort, home
of the last Mughal emperors.
But too often there are monumental difficulties even in making bookings.
Take for example Corbett Park, a wildlife sanctuary in the foothills of the
Himalayas in the state of Uttar Pradesh which is run by the state
government. It is possible to stay in the middle of the park in a simple
tourist centre, which stands on the edge of a wild and beautiful lake.
But control over the rooms in the centre is split between three offices  -
in Delhi, Lucknow and the town of Ramnagar, which is more than an hour's
drive from the park. Trying to make a reservation can involve ringing all
three to ensure that a room booked in one office is confirmed by the others.
By the time the visitor reaches the sanctuary itself it is too late - even
if there are empty unreserved rooms, the staff are not allowed to let them.
Mr Ahuja says the underlying problem is that even though some state
governments - such as Rajasthan - promote tourism, most care too little.
'They can't see that they would benefit from the revenues and the jobs it
will bring.' The central government tries to promote change with publicity
campaigns but it is hampered by the constitutional division of power which
gives the states the prime role in controlling tourism.
India hopes to attract 5m visitors annually by the year 2000. It is hard to
see how it will do this u n l e s s it learns to look more carefully. after
those it already draws.
