
SOME insurance salesmen are giving their clients poor advice on
straightforward life insurance, according to a report just published in
Which?, the magazine of the Consumers' Association.
It sent three researchers to visit 45 vendors who were a mixture of
independent financial advisers, tied agents, or employees of insurance
companies. The researchers asked for advice on the best way to protect their
families' income if they died early.
Which? said the cheapest and most appropriate solution for all of them would
have been term insurance, which pays out an agreed sum if the insured person
dies within a specified period but otherwise has no cash value.
Unfortunately, because term insurance is relatively cheap, it pays low
commission and is often ignored by sales staff looking to maximise their
income.
In this survey, most advisers recommended term insurance, but a number gave
advice described by Which? as 'appalling.' Term insurance was passed over in
favour of products paying higher commission but which were, in some cases,
completely inappropriate.
Twelve recommended whole-of-life insurance. They argued that because it
could be cashed in, the premiums would not be 'wasted.' But such policies
are not efficient ways of saving - you would probably do better buying
protection and investment products separately.
A handful of advisers recommended endowment policies, which would have tied
up more money than the researchers could afford. One even said the endowment
could be encashed after five years, which probably would have lost the
client a lot of money.
The Association of British Insurers says companies are now much more aware
of the importance of training salespeople to make sure they know more about
the products, ask clients the right questions and sell them appropriate
products.
Term insurance is essentially a simple product, but can have refinements.
Variations include automatic annual increases in the sum insured, or
optional increases if your needs change: for example, on the birth of
children.
Some policies can be renewed when they expire, extended earlier, or
converted into a different type. Some insurers even waive premiums if you
are ill or unemployed.
Your state of health has obvious implications for how likely you are to die
within the term for which you are insured. Most companies charge more for
smokers, and may ask you to have a medical if the sum insured is very large
or the medical details you give show that you present a risk.
Prosperity has approached the problem from a different angle with its new
policy, Life Choice. This is available only to healthy people: non-smokers
who are not overweight and do not have a family history of heart disease.
Everyone who applies must have a Bupa Health Check, for which they pay
Pounds 45, but this is offset against premiums.
Premiums, loadings for smokers and so on will vary widely between insurers,
so it is worth making sure you get several quotes or go to an independent
adviser who can find out the best buy for you. Lloyd's of London can offer
more flexible cover, for standard or unusual risks, with terms of anything
from one day to 10 years.
The early death of the main wage-earner is an obvious worry for many
families, but finances can be hit even harder if the main earner becomes
seriously ill or disabled and cannot work but needs special care.
Many insurers now also offer policies which can provide a regular income
while a person is ill, or pay a lump sum if he develops a serious or
terminal illness. Sometimes, this can be combined with life cover, although
it is essential to check if this is better value than buying the two
elements separately.
