
EIGHT-SIX people were feared to have died in an apparent mass suicide
yesterday when the 51-day siege of the Branch Davidian religious cult near
Waco, Texas, ended in an inferno, writes Nancy Dunne in Washington.
The compound housing an estimated 95 followers of religious zealot Mr David
Koresh was destroyed after three fires were started by members of the cult,
possibly with kerosene, according to the FBI. The blaze followed an attempt
by the federal agency to end the stand-off.
The FBI said it believed Mr Koresh ordered a mass suicide and that there had
been 'massive loss of life'. Mr Koresh and all but nine of his followers
were presumed dead.
Seventeen children under 10 years old were believed to be in the compound
when the blaze (pictured above) began. The FBI said that among the nine
survivors were an Australian and two of the 26 Britons believed by the
Foreign Office to have been in the compound.
One survivor was quoted as saying that, after the fires were lit, Mr Koresh
advised his followers to 'relax' because they would soon be seeing 'the face
of God'.
Attorney-general Janet Reno, who took responsibility for the FBI action,
last night said the plan to move against the compound had appeared the best
way to end the stand-off without bloodshed. She absolved President Clinton
of blame, saying he knew only generally of the plan, and added that the FBI
had 'acted professionally and with remarkable restraint'.
The blaze spread swiftly, punctuated by explosions - possibly from the
cult's ammunition stores. It started several hours after the FBI rammed the
compound with tanks and fired tear-gas in an attempt to end the siege. By
the time firemen arrived little was left of the cult's large compound.
The incident appeared to echo the 1978 Jonestown massacre, where more than
800 people died in a mass suicide at a cult centre in the jungles of Guyana.
Only last week Mr Koresh warned FBI agents that they would be 'devoured' by
fire if they tried to harm him. He disappointed federal agents by failing to
surrender, as he had hinted he would, on weapons and other charges, saying
he had yet to receive his instructions from God.
The charges resulted from a raid to confiscate weapons from the cult. The
raid began the stand-off and left four agents and several cult followers
dead.
At the weekend Mr Koresh requested a word processor to enable him to record
his revelations. But the FBI was evidently no longer prepared to wait.
At 5.55am local time yesterday the cult was telephoned and informed that the
FBI would begin to fire teargas into the compound.
Agents moved an armoured vehicle to the corner of the compound but were met
with gunfire.
Mass suicide risk, Page 5
