
DOCKLANDS is caught in a trap when it comes to transport. On the one hand,
it wants to secure investment in more and better links by stressing to
government the inadequacy of the existing infrastructure. On the other, it
seeks to lure investors by telling them how good its transport is now.
Amid the resulting confusion, the overriding impression is that the first of
these two versions is correct: that the government has let docklands down by
failing to provide better transport. Indeed, the developers of Canary Wharf
have directly attributed that project's financial failure to the inadequacy
of the links between central London and the Isle of Dogs. But are these
criticisms founded on reality, or myth?
To answer the question, it is necessary to go back to the beginning of the
docklands story. It is sometimes forgotten just how modest the government's
ambitions for docklands were when it set up the London Docklands Development
Corporation to regenerate the area in 1981. Then, all it foresaw was the
construction of 8.5m sq ft of light industrial premises. Clearly, east
London's transport needs had to be looked at afresh, but at that time it
seemed enough to improve the roads and install the 'toy town' Docklands
Light Railway on a shoestring budget of Pounds 77m.
That might have been the end of the story had it not been for the Reichmann
brothers. But when they and their private property company, Olympia & York,
arrived in 1987 with their grandiose scheme to turn the the Isle of Dogs
into London's third business centre (the other two being the West End and
the City), the transport plans were thrown into chaos.
Considering the scale of the demands being made on it, the government
reacted with astonishing speed and generosity. Within months, it was
carrying out detailed work on the options for improving docklands' transport
infrastructure. The East London Rail Study was completed and published in
January 1989, and in November that same year a Bill to authorise
construction of the Jubilee Line extension went before parliament. More than
Pounds 3.5bn was committed to roads, the Underground line and the upgrading
of the Docklands Light Railway.
It is true that not all this transport investment went smoothly - but then,
transport investment rarely does. Services on the Docklands Light Railway,
for example, were continually disrupted by the upgrading programme.
Under pressure from Olympia & York to do something about the railway's poor
performance, the government eventually stripped control of the line from
London Transport and installed a new management team headed by Sir Peter
Levene, the former procurement chief at the Ministry of Defence.
Worse, the Jubilee Line was never built. But that was not the government's
fault. Since it was the Canary Wharf development that had given rise to the
need for the line, and since Canary Wharf would be the main beneficiary of
it, the government had secured an undertaking from Olympia & York that the
company would make an up-front contribution of Pounds 100m towards the
line's Pounds 1.8bn construction cost.
When Olympia & York collapsed, the company defaulted on its agreement, and
construction of the line has been postponed ever since. In other respects,
however, docklands is now looking well-served by transport. The main
features of the infrastructure include:
Roads: the Pounds 1.65bn roads and river crossings programme is virtually
complete, with many roads opening ahead of schedule.
The single most important road, the underground Limehouse Link, opened six
months ahead of schedule this month greatly improving communications between
docklands and the City. Barely a mile long and costing Pounds 255m to build,
it is reputed to be pro rata one of the most expensive pieces of road in the
world.
Docklands Light Railway: Initially built for Pounds 77m, the Docklands Light
Railway is now approaching the end of an Pounds 800m programme of
improvement and expansion. It has already been extended to Bank in the City;
an eastwards extension to Beckton opens in October; and a southward
extension across the river to Lewisham is planned.
The line is now performing reliably, with capacity greatly increased.
Jubilee Line Extension: the government has pledged that construction of the
Jubilee Line extension from central London to docklands will begin as soon
as the private sector produces its promised Pounds 100m contribution.
Last month the European Investment Bank said it was prepared to plug the gap
by lending Pounds 100m to whoever took over Canary Wharf from the
administrators, but the decision is likely to take some time to translate
into action.
London City Airport: a Pounds 5m runway extension made it possible to
introduce jet services at the privately-owned London City Airport in
docklands last year, leading to an expansion of services.
The airport will also get a boost from the opening of the Limehouse Link,
which it claims will put it within a 15-minute taxi ride of Tower Bridge in
the City.
RiverBus: a fleet of RiverBuses provides a novel form of urban transport
along the Thames between docklands and central London, operating at
15-minute during peak hours.
So where does that leave transport in docklands today?
Whatever else it may be, it is the envy of the rest of the capital - and
indeed, the rest of the country - which has been starved of transport
investment to pay for the Pounds 3.5bn being lavished in east London.
With Canary Wharf in administration and the rest of docklands blighted by
the surpluses overhanging the property market, it could reasonably be argued
that the real question is no longer whether the amount being spent on
transport in the area is too little, but whether it is too much.
Office and industrial property; housing, page 3
A growing community: movers and shakers who are helping to make
Docklands work, page 4
Amenities; leisure facilities; eating out, page 4
