
MR Philippe Maystadt, the Belgian finance minister, yesterday suggested that
the planned European Monetary Institute could start actively co-ordinating
the monetary policies of EC member states with low inflation after it starts
operations in January.
At a seminar on economic and monetary union organised by the Federal Trust
for Education and Research and Salomon Brothers International, Mr Maystadt
floated the idea of low-inflation EC countries agreeing a common monetary
growth target. The EMI could then use this to organise monetary
co-ordination and monitor progress towards the achievement of durable price
stability in the Community.
The minister, who is current president of the European Community council of
economics and finance ministers, also suggested that the EMI might take over
announcing policy decisions such as interest rate changes of member central
banks agreeing to a common monetary target during the second stage of Emu
which begins in January.
The EMI, which will be based in Frankfurt and is seen as a forerunner of a
European central bank, has so far been given only vague guidance on the
scope of its operations and Mr Maystadt's remarks yesterday represented an
attempt to set an agenda for the institute.
In view of the 'rather long' second stage envisaged for Emu, it was
important to launch a qualitative step towards further European integration
and to ensure that the EMI is not perceived as an empty shell, he said. Mr
Maystadt said that national central banks would continue to make independent
monetary policy decisions.
But he admitted that his idea of an EC monetary target would push the
bankers and the EMI towards the 'ultimate goal of conducting a single
monetary policy at Community level'.
Not surprisingly, his approach found no UK support. Mr Christopher Taylor,
the Bank of England's chief European adviser, said the EMI's role should be
advisory and consultative, and it should have only a small staff.
Mr Taylor said the UK was wary of monetary aggregates and stressed that the
EMI 'must not interfere with, or cut across, the monetary and exchange rate
policies of member states.'
Mr Maystadt warned the EC against trying to operate the European exchange
rate mechanism with widened 15 per cent fluctuation margins until full
monetary union. The approach of Emu could trigger competitive currency
depreciation and threaten the EC single market, he said.
He admitted that January 1 1999 was now a more realistic target for
transition to a fully fledged monetary union than the original objective in
the Maastricht Treaty of 1997 for stage three.
