
US Attorney General Janet Reno said last night she asked 'question after
question' before giving the go-ahead for the FBI action which ended in the
fiery suicide of religious cult members in Waco, Texas.
'Obviously, if I thought the chance was great of mass suicide, I would never
have approved the plan,' Ms Reno said.
The deaths confronted Ms Reno with a crisis just a month after being sworn
in as the first woman attorney general in the US. The crisis appeared to set
the seal on the expected replacement of the embattled FBI director, Mr
William Sessions.
'I approved the plan and I am responsible for it,' Ms Reno said.
Ms Reno said the FBI plan had been part of a 'coherent and continuing'
effort to bring a peaceful end to the 51-day siege of the cult group's
compound.
The plan was gradually to 'compress the perimeter' of the compound. She had
discussed and questioned the details with various experts over the last
week.
Ms Reno said President Bill Clinton had been 'mindful' of the mass suicide
of a religious group in Guyana in 1978. The emphasis in Washington had been
on achieving a peaceful resolution. Ms Reno said: 'I advised the president
but I did not advise him of the details.' When a reporter asked whether
there was an effort to shield Mr Clinton from any blame, she said: 'I'm
accountable, the buck stops with me.'
However, there will be much second-guessing now by politicians in
Washington. Mr Clinton was told of the plan and approved it, although the
Justice Department had 'operational control'.
There may be questions about whether the FBI's moves to ram holes in the
religious group's bunker and to throw tear gas into the holes were not an
attempt to do more than shrink the perimeter of the compound.
If 'today was not to be the day' for final action - as Ms Reno indicated to
the press - but just an attempt to force the cult members into an ever
smaller area, this appeared hard to reconcile with the broadcasting of
directions over a loudspeaker about how to surrender.
The FBI spokesman, Mr Bob Ricks said: 'Our desire was to get them out of
there in a non-lethal, systematic manner.' He added: 'I have no doubt that
our plan was correct.'
The FBI had acted with bravery, even refusing to return fire coming from the
cult members, he said. One FBI agent even left his vehicle to grab a burning
woman and take her, against her will, to safety.
Although he voiced regrets, anger appeared Mr Ricks' uppermost emotion. The
cult leader, 33-year-old David Koresh, had 'lied' as his last act, telling
the FBI before the inferno that group's children were safe in underground
bunkers. Instead, there were upstairs in the compound.
'We hoped the women would grab their children and flee out,' he said. In
fact, he said, there were reports that the children may have been given
poison or injections to quieten them.
The FBI's tear gas had 'absolutely nothing to do with the suicide,' he said.
It was the cult leader, who gave the order to commit suicide. 'He played the
game,' Mr Ricks said. 'He never intended to come out. He wanted to kill some
FBI people first.'
In Waco, the blaze left the cult compound a smouldering ruin - a grim
testimony to Mr Koresh's claims to be a new Messiah come to warn the world
that its end was near. In the eyes of FBI spokesman Ricks, mass suicide was
what Koresh wanted all along.
