
WHAT KIND of car do you buy if you have a large family? The fashionable
solution is a multi-purpose vehicle (MPV) like the Nissan Serena I wrote
about last week.
There is no doubt that MPVs have a lot going for them as people-carriers.
One version of the Serena - and the larger Toyota Previa - takes up to
eight. A Renault Espace or a Mitsubishi Space Wagon seats up to seven. But
there is a snag. Where does the luggage go when an MPV is carrying its full
quota of people?
The answer: mostly on the floor or a roof rack. Not even the Previa has more
than a modest amount of proper luggage room when all eight of its seats are
filled. And the spare pair that make an Espace or Space Wagon  - or 4 x 4s
like the Land Rover Discovery - into a 6/7-seater take up what is normally
the load space.
With one exception, the handful of conventionally-shaped 6/7-seat estate
cars are no better. Rover Montego, Mercedes-Benz 200-300 and Volvo 940
estates become seven-seaters only when their rear-facing occasional seats
for children are pulled up from the load compartment floor.
Friends of mine who had five young daughters and a holiday home in France
side-stepped the problem neatly. They bought a pair of Renault 4s and split
the girls between them. There was plenty of room for luggage in two boots.
An alternative could have been one of the genuine family estate cars that
were a French speciality. For years, Peugeot and Citroen made stretched,
seven-seat versions of their biggest estate cars, the 405 and 505, DS and
CX. Because they were longer in body and wheelbase, they had room for three
rows of face-forward seats plus a fair amount of luggage.
Sadly for parents of large families, they are not made any more. Last to go
was the Peugeot 505 familiale, a gentle giant of a car. Even with seven on
board, it had a load floor 29in deep and 51in wide (72cm x127cm) behind the
third row of seats. This bench was habitable by adults and plenty big enough
for two children to be comfortable on a journey. With middle and rear rows
of seats folded flat, the familiale had a load floor 83in (207cm) long. They
come larger only in vans.
So, where are the family estates today? Gone but not forgotten, so far as
Peugeot and Citroen are concerned. The 505 lived on for a time after the 605
appeared, but is no longer made. Peugeot says there will never be a
605-based estate car. Citroen denies any intention of adding a stretched
familiale estate, with three rows of forward-facing seats, to its XM range.
The only one of the breed still surviving - although, I fear, not for much
longer - is the Renault Savanna. It is not as big as the 505 and CX but at
least it allows parents to carry four offspring, fastened safely in child
seats and facing forward, plus some luggage.
The Savanna (Nevada on mainland Europe) with up to seven seats is listed at
between Pounds 11,810 and Pounds 12,770. You can pay more than that for a
low-mileage, H- or J-registered Peugeot 505 2.5 GRD familiale in mint
condition if you are lucky enough to find one. Its Citroen counterpart, the
CX22 RS, will be much cheaper (around Pounds 4,000) but older;
G-registration models were the last to be sold in Britain.
