
LOW PRICES threaten the survival of the tungsten industry in many countries
and the security of tungsten supply, Mr Carlos Fortin, deputy
secretary-general of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
said yesterday.
Mine operations have fallen to just six small mines in industrialised
countries and 25 in developing countries, compared with 60 and 74
respectively in 1980, Mr Fortin said. Even those were operating at below 60
per cent of capacity.
Tungsten ores and concentrates, which fetched as much as Dollars 170 a tonne
in the late 1970s, were now trading as low as Dollars 20 a tonne, he said.
Tungsten producing and consuming countries have been meeting this week in
Geneva against the background of 'unprecedented distress' in the industry,
which has seen tungsten demand, prices and mine production plunge to their
lowest levels since the mid-1960s.
The 15 countries attending the three-day annual market review, which ended
yesterday, account for about 90 per cent of world trade in tungsten
products. They include China, the biggest producer, which represents over 60
per cent of world trade; Russia, which ranks second in production; and the
three biggest importers, the US, Germany and Japan.
The slide in tungsten prices is largely the result of weak activity in the
main tungsten consuming industries, especially toolmaking, car production
and defence, according to Unctad.
However, structural changes in the tungsten industry, including substitution
by new products, 'do not allow for optimism for the tungsten market even in
the longer term, unless new end-use applications are found', the group said.
During the Geneva meeting, China reported falling exports of tungsten ores
and concentrates in the first nine months of 1993, while the US expected a 9
per cent drop in consumption this year after a 25 per cent fall in 1992.
Unctad's latest estimates show a 17 per cent drop in world consumption last
year to 30,499 tonnes, and a 19 per cent slide in production to 28,864
tonnes. Exports of ores and concentrates slipped by 41 per cent to 7,057
tonnes, reflecting higher consumption of imported intermediate products by
the main consuming countries.
The share of tungsten ores and concentrates in world trade has more than
halved over the past decade, from nearly 70 per cent in 1983 to 30.6 per
cent in 1992.
