
FRENCH car manufacturers cannot remember when times were so hard.
Recession at home, falling demand in most of their principal European
markets and the increased price competitiveness of many of their
international rivals have left Peugeot-Citroen and Renault struggling to
respond to the downturn.
The domestic market, burdened by a sluggish economy and depressed consumer
confidence, contracted by 17 per cent in the first seven months of the year,
compared to the same period in 1992. Motor industry analysts see little hope
for rapid improvement.
'There isn't any sign of an upturn for the rest of the year,' says Mr Bob
Barber at James Capel, who forecasts a full year decline in the French car
market of about 15 per cent.
The downturn has taken its toll on the two principal carmakers, particularly
in their home market. Registrations of Peugeot-Citroen cars in France fell
by almost 19 per cent - to 300,500 vehicles - in the first seven months of
1993. Renault did better, but still suffered a fall of 12.7 per cent - to
314,000 vehicles, according to figures from the Committee of French
Automobile Constructors.
Profits will naturally be affected. Renault, the world's most profitable car
manufacturer in 1992 (in terms of the ratio of net profits to sales), saw
pre-tax profits plunge by by almost 90 per cent - from FFr5.44bn TO FFr730m
in the first half of the year. Peugeot-Citroen, which saw profits fall from
FFr5.53bn to FFr3.37bn in 1992, is expected by most car industry analysts to
fall into loss this year.
Amid the gloom, however, there are some signs of encouragement.
Improved sales in the UK and increased market share in Germany allowed
Peugeot-Citroen to report first half sales of FFr73.05bn, a fall of 11.4 per
cent over the first half of 1992.
This decline masked a relatively strong second quarter, in which sales fell
by 6.8 per cent.
'The results were better than expected,' says one French car industry
analyst, adding that the introduction of new models such as the Citroen
Xantia and the Peugeot 306 would help sales, particularly with the
introduction - in June - of diesel models.
For Renault, there is consolation in the fact that the company is winning
market share from its domestic rival and from international manufacturers.
'Renault has continued to strengthen its image at the expense of Peugeot,'
says one car industry executive in Paris, citing the Safrane, the high-end
model which has enjoyed a successful introduction.
For both car manufacturers there is also the potential benefit of a weaker
franc.
Peugeot-Citroen and Renault have both lost competitiveness compared with
manufacturers in Spain, the UK and Italy, which have all seen their
currencies depreciate significantly over the past nine months.
The weakening of the European exchange rate mechanism at the beginning of
last month, however, has brought a depreciation of the franc of about 3 per
cent. It has also raised the prospect of reduced financial costs through
lower interest rates.
But the prospect of continued depressed demand raises a series of difficult
decisions for the French carmakers. In particular they are faced with the
need to reduce production to adapt to the adverse conditions.
Peugeot-Citroen has already announced reduced working days at its factories
in Mulhouse and Sochaux in eastern France and is reducing its workforce by
almost 3,000 this year. It has also announced that it is stopping production
of its 405 model in its UK factory.
Car industry analysts in Paris say that, for Renault, the downturn in the
market increases pressure to finalise its merger with Volvo, the Swedish car
manufacturer, so as to achieve production economies.
Mr Gerard Longuet, the French industry minister, is pressing Renault to
complete the alliance with Volvo to prepare the French carmaker for
privatisation.
A final deal, which is thought to be imminent, will give the merged company
12 per cent of the European car market and more than 20 per cent of the
European truck market.
It will allow the merged company to achieve economies of scale and reduced
production costs and enable joint marketing and research operations.
If the French government has sought to galvanise the two companies into a
speedier marriage, it has also sought to protect the French car market from
what it regards as unwelcome suitors.
Both Mr Longuet and Mr Alain Lamassoure, the minister for European affairs,
have appealed to the European Commission to re-open negotiations with
Japanese car manufacturers concerning the level of their exports to the
European market.
The French government argues that the worse than expected decline in the
European market requires a further cut in Japanese exports. The Japanese
Ministry of Trade and Industry had previously agreed to a reduction of about
9.4 per cent in exports to the EC, based on a fall in European car sales of
6.5 per cent.
The two sides are expected to meet again in September to discuss the issue.
But the mood of the French car makers is unlikely to have been improved by
then.
