
MR JOHN CAHILL, chairman of British Aerospace, is expected to hold a series
of meetings today with Taiwanese politicians, bankers and industrialists in
an attempt to resolve outstanding differences over a proposed Pounds 250m
joint venture to build passenger aircraft.
Senior officials of Taiwan Aerospace Corporation, BAe's partner in the
proposed venture, confirmed yesterday that talks with Mr Cahill would
concentrate on bank financing of the deal.
The joint venture, called Avro, is a pillar of Mr Cahill's recovery strategy
for BAe. The range of regional jets that would be partly manufactured in
Taiwan currently loses money for BAe.
For Taiwan, the project would provide a rapid route to understanding western
aerospace technology and techniques of aircraft financing, such as leases.
Discussions between Mr Cahill's team and the Taiwanese would centre on
'differences in banking laws between the UK and Taiwan', said a senior
vice-president of TAC.
These relate to the nature of Avro's collateral against loans from Taiwanese
banks. The state-owned Chiao Tung bank, which is leading the lending
consortium, will have a significant stake in Avro. But Taiwanese banking law
prohibits any bank from making unsecured loans to a company in which it has
more than a 3 per cent stake. It is unclear if Avro's assets - BAe property,
plant and equipment in the UK - qualify as collateral.
A deal to establish the joint venture was signed in January by Mr Cahill and
Mr Denny Ko, TAC's president. Since then, both companies have laboured to
finalise the arrangements, sometimes against scepticism from Taiwanese
banking officials who question the sales potential of the aircraft.
Further details of how Avro would be managed also emerged yesterday. The aim
of the venture is to produce a new passenger jet aircraft with two engines
rather than the four on BAe's existing regional jet aircraft, the RJ series.
TAC regards modern engines as reliable enough for a twin-engined aircraft to
operate from the remote regions for which the RJ series and its predecessor,
the 146, were designed.
The new aircraft, the RJ-X, would be 25 per cent built in Taiwan and 25 per
cent in the UK. The remainder - wings, engines and avionics - would be built
by US companies.
Until the RJ-X enters production towards the end of the decade, Taiwan would
concentrate on final assembly and fuselage construction of existing RJ
series models.
Initial markets for both new and existing aircraft types would be Taiwan's
domestic airlines, with which TAC is 'well connected', said the TAC senior
vice-president.
Other potential markets are the fast-growing regions of south-east Asia and
China. Chinese airlines already have 17 BAe 146s. A crash in China on July
23 is still under investigation.
