
it is up near the top left-hand corner, tucked between the borders of
Montana, Idaho and the Canadian province of Alberta.
Modern travel being what it is, however, you can fly from New York to
Whitefish in just a few hours, via Salt Lake City to Kalispell airport. A
few miles away is Whitefish, a small place (population: 4,500), with no big
hotels, a few shops and a handful of bars. The nightlife is limited, but
pursued with enthusiasm, particularly at the 'World Famous Kick-Ass' Palace
Bar, home to local heavy metal bands and midnight mouse racing.
Although you might not notice it at first, Whitefish is also a ski town  -
which is why I was there. About 20 minutes' drive from downtown Whitefish is
the ski resort of Big Mountain. Like Whitefish, Big Mountain is a
determinedly unglamorous place. A cluster of small, functional buildings
sits at the base of uncrowded pistes. Below, an unobtrusive collection of
houses and lodges is hidden within the treeline. There is not a Marriott or
a Ritz-Carlton in sight and the car park is packed with pickups and
beaten-up saloons.
Again, like the town and the resort centre, the mountain itself does not
look much at first - but first appearances can deceive. Big Mountain boasts
a 2,400ft vertical drop, 56 trails and six main chairlifts - an
average-sized resort by North American standards. Yet, off the marked trails
it has hundreds of acres of skiing among fir trees (many bent into bizarre
shapes by the weight of the frost, creating the region's trademark 'snow
ghosts'), along gullies, through glades, down chutes, and into the basins of
small bowls.
The front face of the mountain offers a variety of comfortable green and
blue runs and the occasional challenging black. Each day I started with an
intermediate trail called Inspiration, a fast descent down the mountain that
takes in views of Whitefish lake and the agricultural lands of the Flathead
valley. Later in the week, those views were obscured by clouds which lap at
the feet of the mountains like waves in a thick cotton sea. Clouds are
common on Big Mountain, but then so is snow.
Although there was no powder the week I was there, the north face of the
mountain, where the slopes escape the freeze-thaw cycle, offered a fresh
supply of light powdery snow that keeps its condition throughout each day.
Here, steeply pitched mogul runs, like the intimidating Bighorn, challenge
both technique and courage.
What Big Mountain may lack in size, it more than makes up for in extras,
such as Snowcat skiing - for Dollars 35 (Pounds 23.40) a snow tractor will
take you into the back country in search of powder - and night skiing. The
latter is especially thrilling. On my first day, I skied late into the
afternoon, then continued under the floodlights in the cooling night air. I
finished, just as the mountain was closing, by skipping off the main run to
end the evening alone on shadowy slopes lit only by a three-quarter moon.
Each day, or night, always ends at Big Mountain's favourite slopeside haunt -the Hell Roaring Saloon. The Hell Roaring is an apres-ski bar from the
days before they called them apres-ski bars. Crowded with skiers, locals and
mountain workers, it is wood-panelled, comfortable, and noisy.
The Hell Roaring is also home to the most unusual special offer in mountain
retailing. Buy a Hell Roaring Saloon cap for Dollars 15 and you are entitled
to one free draught beer every day for the rest of your life. Cap on head,
pint in hand, I quickly worked out that at two bucks a beer, I needed to
stay at least seven days to make a profit on the deal. If ever there was an
incentive to stay in Montana, skiing and drinking beer, this was it.
