
COMPETITION between British Telecommunications and local cable operators is
expected to intensify with the signing of a new agreement between leading
operators and Mercury Communications.
The agreement yesterday gives the cable companies improved rates for
completing the long-distance parts of calls made on their local phone
networks, and will enable them to undercut BT's prices further in their
franchise areas.
The cable companies - General Cable, Nynex, Encom, Southwestern Bell,
TeleWest and Videotron - control 60 local franchises between them, and
provide most of the estimated 180,000 cable telephone lines currently in
service.
The agreement revises tariffs for carrying their long-distance traffic on
Mercury's network. It covers traffic for which Mercury provides the
switching facilities and also business that operators choose to switch
through their own facilities.
At present Mercury switches nearly all cable traffic across the network.
However, cable operators are keen to do their own switching, to give greater
flexibility in services and choice of long-distance carrier. Last week one
operator switched its own traffic for the first time, and the others are
expected to follow.
Earlier this month the cable companies signed an agreement with BT which
reportedly gave them 50 per cent of the gross call revenues for traffic
switched by the cable operators, against about 25 per cent under the old
Mercury agreement.
The operators would not disclose the precise figures in yesterday's deal,
but the new Mercury agreement gives them better overall terms than those
available with BT and they intend to continue using Mercury for the bulk of
their long-distance traffic.
Though Mercury was under pressure to match the BT offer, it also has an
interest in the cable operators flourishing at the expense of BT. Take-up of
cable telephony is as high as 30 per cent in some franchise areas, which
represents significant extra revenue for Mercury as long-distance carrier.
Mr Eugene Connell, director of Nynex's UK operations, said: 'The new
agreement reflects our commitment to developing a real alternative to BT in
the local market.'
Mr Andy Coleman, managing director of Mercury's business and consumer
division, claimed the agreement 'strengthened' its relationship with the
cable operators.
