
THE WORLD'S top word processing package sells around 1m copies a month, with
over 22m sold to date. Is it Word for Windows perhaps, or WordPerfect, or
maybe Wordstar? No, compared with THIS package these are small potatoes. The
top seller sells more than all three put together.
So which is the world's best-selling word processor? The answer, of course,
is Windows Write, which comes free with every copy of Microsoft Windows.
I have been using Write for a couple of months now and very impressed I am
too. All the basic functions are there - word wrap, cut and paste, layout
controls, and the full range of Windows fonts. Very similar in appearance to
Microsoft Word for Windows, Write only lacks Word's heavyweight features for
handling multipage documents and sophisticated page layouts. For the
two-finger typist who wants to produce basic letters, memos and reports
Write is ideal, and its simplicity makes it one of the easiest packages to
learn.
But the computer industry despises the simple and applauds the complex, so
Write is virtually ignored. Of those 22m purchasers of Windows, I would be
willing to bet that a high proportion have no idea that Write exists, let
alone that they own a copy. If there is a PC in your office which has been
bought during the last two years, there is a good chance that unknown to you
Windows Write has been sitting there all the time. Perhaps you should take a
look?
You will need some help to find your way around Windows and Write.
Unfortunately, the Windows manual is difficult to use. Nor can I find any
recommendable self-teach books. Few of them take Write seriously. The best
of a mediocre bunch is Robert Cowart's Mastering Windows 3.1 (Sybex).
I have put together a brief tutorial to help you find out whether you have
Windows on your PC and how to get started on Write. I have assumed you are a
non-mouse user so a mouse is not required. (By the way, if you do not use
Windows you may believe that you cannot use it without a mouse. Not so. In
fact, the key to becoming productive in Windows is to forget the mouse and
to master the keyboard commands just like a DOS package. A full set of these
'keyboard shortcuts' can be found in Appendix C of the Windows manual).
1. First, check that you have Windows: start up the computer. It should
display C:> (the 'C prompt') Type CDWINDOWS and press Enter. If the screen
now displays c:windows> you are in business
2. Type WIN and press Enter. The Windows screen appears, headed
'File-Options-Window-Help'.
3. Call up the 'Window' option by holding down the Alt key (to left of the
spacebar) and pressing W.
4. Use down arrow to highlight and select 'Accessories'.
5. The 13 Windows accessory programs (Paintbrush, Notepad etc) appear.
Write's icon is a quill pen. Use the arrow keys to highlight Write. Press
Enter. The heading 'Write - (Untitled)' appears over a File-Edit-Find menu.
You are now in Windows Write.
6. Bring up the 'File' menu by pressing Alt-F.
7. Press the right arrow six times to go through the other menus, finishing
at the Help menu. 8. Now, from the Help menu option, press right arrow once
more. You see an unexpected menu headed 'Restore, Move etc'. It shows the
all-important Alt-F4 key which is rather like Escape in DOS. There are also
commands for varying the size of the screen. 'Maximise' the Write screen now
pressing X.
9. Press Alt-H for Help and Enter for Contents. Press down arrow to list all
the features of Write. Look at the bottom one - 'Document Help Commands' by
pressing the Tab key repeatedly and working your way down (if you go too
far, shift-tab will take you back).
10. Exit from Help by pressing Alt-F4. You are now back at the blank
File-Edit-Find screen. At this point either start experimenting or use
Cowart, chapter nine.
Cut and paste in Write is delightfully easy. Try this. Type three lines of
text. Now move line one to below line three as follows: move the cursor to
the start of line one; Shift-Down arrow to highlight line one; Shift-Delete
key to delete line one. Move the cursor to below line three; Shift-Insert
key to insert line one.
If you use a mouse you can accomplish most of the above by moving and
pointer to the instruction you want and clicking the button.
You will find that the rest of Write is similarly elegant and simple. No
wonder this is the world's best selling word processing package.
