
Brand manufacturers have warned that they will reconsider UK investment
plans unless curbs are put on supermarket 'lookalike' products.
The manufacturers are furious with a government decision not to amend the
trademarks bill to restrict the use of lookalikes.
The warning has been given by Coca-Cola, manufacturer of the world's
best-selling branded product, and by members of the British Producers and
Brand Owners Group.
Ministers and officials say that they have been given legal advice that it
is too late to amend the bill, which was recently given a second reading in
the Commons.
The Department of Trade and Industry said: 'The DTI takes Coca-Cola's threat
very seriously. But there is nothing ministers can do in the medium term'.
New legislation on brands in the next parliamentary session is almost
impossible for lack of time.
Mr Patrick McLoughlin, the trade minister, has asked his department's
standing advisory committee on industrial property to investi-gate the
question of whether new legislation is needed to curb the use of lookalikes.
But this has failed to placate Coca-Cola and the brand owners group, which
includes Procter & Gamble, Unilever and Mars.
They have told Mr McLoughlin that they have no confidence in the advisory
committee, which they consider is biased towards the interests of
supermarkets. The advisory committee consists of industry and consumer lobby
groups.
Many brand manufacturers believe that supermarkets' own label instant
coffees and shampoos often look deceptively like their own branded products,
but not quite close enough to allow them to take legal action for 'passing
off'.
Coca-Cola, which is not a member of the brand owners group, is furious at
the supermarket chain J. Sainsbury for having recently launched a cola
called Classic, in a red livery containing the slogan 'original American
taste'.
The company insists that it is not opposed to own-label products, but argues
that it is unfair competition for supermarkets to package their products to
look like the market leaders. It argues that supermarkets are parasitically
benefitting from brand manufacturers' substantial investment in packaging
design and advertising.
