
Rums reflect the nations that make them,' said Vincent Osborne, the jolly
proprietor of the soon-to-be-three branches of the Brixtonian bars and
restaurants.
'You wouldn't expect much subtlety from a Jamaican. Jamaicans are not subtle
people.' Reading my thoughts, he added that he was not from Jamaica, but
from quite another Caribbean island.
Osborne proved his point in the course of a tasting of a couple of dozen
rums in his Covent Garden branch, Brixtonian Backayard.
Rum is distilled wherever sugar cane is grown and in a few places where it
is not. There is African rum from Nigeria, Kenya or South Africa; Indian rum
reeking of petrol; Australian rum, which in its heyday was aged in old wine
casks from the Hunter Valley; and north and south American rum. The best, of
course, comes from the Caribbean.
Some rums from the former Spanish colonies were predictably fashioned for
the sweet-toothed: Ron Colonial, a golden rum from Guatamala, or Ron Artemi
from the Canary Islands, for example.
Cuba had its own style of white, un-aged rum, of which Bacardi is now the
best known example, even if it is now no longer made in Cuba and is these
days less of a rum than a popular white spirit. If you want to try a Cuban
white rum you would be better off with Havana Club. Both a white rum, and a
three-year-old, golden, banana-smelling rum are available here.
The old French colonies and the two French islands of Martinique and
Guadeloupe (which are now departments of France) make the best rums. Most
are made in column stills which produce a less pungent spirit than that made
in Jamaica, and one which needs a longer process of maturation.
Osborne let me taste a 15-year-old from the famous old Barbancourt estate on
Haiti which was wonderfully complex, if slightly too woody in the mouth. He
charges Pounds 13 a shot for this, but concedes that its rarity together
with the difficulty obtaining it (he has to trawl the bas fonds of Miami to
lay his hands on the odd bottle) tends to push the price up.
Martinique white rums don't impress me much, perhaps because I am reluctant
to see any drink submerged beneath a liquidised fruit cocktail. The Saint
James brand, widely distributed in France, makes a Royal Ambre which despite
a slightly sicky nose has lots of spice on the palate.
Even better were two rums from J. Bailly at Larjus du Carbet in Martinique.
The 1966 was a dream, an absolute must for anyone who doubts rum's ability
to hold its own among the world's great digestifs. From the Domaine de
Montebello came a 1948 rum which was magnificently spicy: cinnamon, cloves
and ginger.
In the old British colonies many of the rums were made in pot stills using
molasses as opposed to the cane juice preferred by the French. The result
can be very 'estery'.
Ben Cross de Chavannes, a veteran rum trader, showed me some startling
figures relating to the ester-count in Jamaican rums. In layman's terms this
means that many Jamaican rums are a good deal more aromatic than malt
whisky. Some of these rums are blended with less pungent distillates before
they are bottled in order to tame their natural explosivity.
Many Jamaican rums are bottled at high strength. These used to be the 'high
wines' - the 'fore-shots' of the distillation which are generally
redistilled because they have an off-flavour or 'feint' . During the Great
War these were the only spirits made available to the Jamaicans, and they
developed a taste for them. Fortunately, perhaps, these are not widely
available.
Anyone wishing to try a subtle white rum from a British island, should
sample The Baron's CSR from St Kitts, which is remarkably smooth. Cockspur
is a golden rum with a well-mannered drink with a faintly nutmeg-like aroma.
Not so Lang's Finest Old Banana. This shoots fruit at you from 30 paces; not
even drowning it in fruit juice was able to suppress its violent bouquet.
Two rather more house-tamed rums are El Dorado Demerara rum (from Guyana)
and Alfred Lamb reserve. The 15-year-old Guyanese rum has a smell which
reminded me of angelica. The Lamb is a rather buttery drink, big and
warming. These two come closest to being after-dinner drinks, but the French
in Martinique and Guadeloupe, I'm sorry to say, do it a lot better.
The Brixtonian. 11 Dorrell Place, London SW9 (071-978 8870); Brixtonian
Backayard, 4 Neal's Yard, London, WC2. (071-240 2769); from early January, a
new Brixtonian will be open at 269 Portobello Road, London W10 (081-968
6188).
