
It was the kind of motoring few believe still possible and fewer have
experienced. The road - well-graded, signposted lavishly and mostly
well-surfaced - ran through ranges of rocky hills that changed colour by the
minute. It was almost free of traffic; the sun blazed down from a cloudless
sky; and the open, two-litre Peugeot 306 cabriolet matched the mood
perfectly.
I was in Egypt, driving down the west coast of the Gulf of Aqaba to Sharm
al-Sheikh and the Ras Muhammad nature reserve on Sinai's southern tip. For
most of the way, the land is uninhabited.
On the straights, with clear visibility for miles, the Peugeot ran safely up
to its maximum 121mph (195kph). On the winding passes, it cornered as though
glued to the tarmac, the 123-horsepower engine singing sweetly in third and
fourth.
In Sharm al-Sheikh itself, a prudent 25mph (40kph) or less was dictated by a
combination of ferocious speed humps and locals unable to decide on which
side of the road to drive. But the Peugeot's suspension dealt as capably
with deep potholes as it had with the odd stretch of broken surface at high
speed.
For the cabriolet, Peugeot has reinforced the 306 hatchback body shell
heavily and tuned the suspension. As a result, the open body is so stiff
that, even on corrugated dirt roads, the fascia did not shake. (I have known
some open cars to shake so badly that the instruments became a blur on
moderately rough surfaces.)
The hood is super-efficient, too. Unlock a pair of clips on the windscreen,
press a button - and the top vanishes under an automatic pop-up panel in the
rear deck.
There is not quite so much room in the back seat as in a 306 hatchback but,
for a cabriolet, the boot is surprisingly wide and deep. Driving position
and general dynamics - the accurate power-assisted steering, light gear
shift, powerful brakes and sure-footed handling - are as good as one expects
of a Peugeot.
Even at maximum speed, hood and windows down, your head feels in no danger
of being blown off. Windows up, and with an optional extra (around Pounds
100) air-deflecting mesh in place, there is barely enough draught at modest
speeds to ruffle the hair.
A hard top that fits over the folded-down hood during winter months will be
offered later.
On the return leg, I drove a 1.8-litre cabriolet. It lacked just a little of
the bigger car's muscle (103hp against 123) but was just as enjoyable,
cornering as capably and riding the bumps a shade more comfortably than the
squatter-tyred two-litre. Curiously, the less-powerful model has slightly
higher gearing, but it drives just as flexibly at low speeds.
Mainland European buyers will also be offered a 1.8-litre cabriolet with
automatic transmission. But Britain - initially, at any rate - will get only
the two-litre manual, which arrives in May and is likely to cost about
Pounds 17,000.
Peugeot expects to sell 1,000 a year in Britain of the 306 cabriolets. Some
will be bought by people who might otherwise have gone for posh Escort,
Astra, Golf, Renault 19 or Rover 220 soft tops.
But Peugeot also has the upmarket BMW 3-Series and Audi 80 convertibles in
its sights. And the 306 - especially when topless - looks so seductive that
the 1,000-a-year forecast might turn out on the low side if the UK has a few
decent summers.
The day before visiting Sharm al-Sheikh in the 306 cabriolets, I drove a new
1.6-litre Peugeot 106 Griffe from Aqaba in Jordan to Petra. (There, I
swopped it for a sure-footed little Arab grey to ride down the narrow gorge
to the ruins of the ancient city.
Emerging to see the rose-red Nabbatean treasury glowing theatrically in the
sunshine was everything I had imagined it would be - a moment of sheer
magic).
Driving north up the main highway from Aqaba, the Griffe flew past
articulated lorries groaning uphill and creeping cautiously down. On the
sinuous minor road to Wadi Musa and Petra, I found it urbane and
entertaining.
For the return leg I tried the latest version of the sporty 106 XSi,
1.6-engined like the Griffe but with five more horsepower (95 against 90)
and firmer suspension.
On balance, I preferred the Griffe. It had all the handling and road-holding
anyone could use responsibly on public roads, plus the ride comfort of a
much larger car.
Aware that Griffe and grief sound the same to Britons, but have different
meanings, Peugeot will call the new luxury 106 the Gentry when it arrives in
September, priced between Pounds 11,000 and Pounds 11,500.
The XSi, due in the UK in June, will be just under Pounds 11,000.
A feature of the PSA/Fiat multi-purpose vehicles, the Peugeot 806 among
them, unveiled at Geneva show (this column, March 12/13) is a gear lever
protruding not from the floor but the fascia. Its movement is exactly the
same but the floor is left uncluttered.
Having tried and liked it in a new Peugeot Boxer light commercial, I think
it could start a new fashion. Or, thinking of the Renault 4 and Citroen 2CV,
which had something similar, it might revive a very old one.
