
Once more, Christmas has been heralded by the sound of UK retailers
complaining of disappointing sales. The main cause of disappointment this
year is cyclical: consumers are not spending as much as they normally do at
this stage of economic recovery. But the cry is a familiar one: it seems
that Christmas is often a disappointment for the retail trade.
This is strange, because a study of UK consumption data shows the Christmas
season is normally anything but a retail disappointment. In 1993, for
example, seasonal factors contributed an extra Pounds 5bn to fourth-quarter
consumption, compared to the third-quarter level. Given that consumption as
a whole rose by just Pounds 8bn in 1993, it becomes obvious why retailers
have high expectations for Christmas.
Examining these seasonal fluctuations in consumption gives a fascinating
insight into the Christmas habits of the UK. We may all think we
over-indulge enormously at the end of year. But food consumption rises by
only about 2.75 per cent in the fourth quarter of the year.
We certainly drink and smoke a lot more as a nation at Christmas - the
seasonal effect generates an extra 19.8 per cent of alcohol and tobacco
expenditure. The combination of cold weather and new winter fashions leads
to a substantial increase in expenditure on clothing and footwear, with
fourth-quarter consumption 23 per cent higher.
The data also reveal that the additional spending at Christmas has been
steadily rising over the years and is now at its highest since records
began.
The seasonal boost to consumption of non-durables - food, drink, clothing,
energy and the like - has risen from Pounds 1.6bn in 1960 to Pounds 4.8bn in
1990. Between 1960 and 1993 this increased Christmas effect boosted
consumption by more than Pounds 57 per head of the population (in 1990
prices).
The table shows which goods and services are most affected by this increased
Christmas effect. It shows the percentage growth in fourth-quarter
consumption which is entirely due to seasonal factors - and how this have
changed over the years. Most notable is the surge in Christmas spending on
drink, tobacco and 'other goods' such as sports equipment, toys, books,
toiletries and jewellery.
If the Christmas seasonal effect has increased over the years, what has
caused this change? Economic commentators invariably explain changes in
consumption by reference either to changes in household income or interest
rates.
However, neither of these can explain why Christmas consumption is becoming
more important. The variation in household income between seasons is not
large - and has been getting smaller.
There is a seasonal pattern in interest rates: bank base rates tend to be
highest in the last two quarters of the year. However, there is no evidence
that this seasonal pattern has altered over the years, so it cannot explain
the growth in consumption at Christmas.
Similarly, the weather offers little explanation of what is going on. While
the weather clearly influences how much we spend, it does not explain the
growth in Christmas spending.
It is to social customs that we must look if we are to explain these
seasonal consumption changes. We tend to think of Christmas traditions as
fixed and unalterable, but in practice the English Christmas has changed
considerably.
The social historian John Pimlott has investigated the changing features of
the English Christmas in his fascinating book The Englishman's Christmas
(Harvester Press, 1978). Far from finding that Christmas present is the same
as Christmas past, he concludes that 'it is part of the tradition that
Christmas is never as it used to be'.
These changes can be seen by looking at consumption of particular
commodities. In 1955, for instance, more chicken was eaten than turkey at
Christmas. By 1977, more chicken was eaten in a normal week of the year than
at Christmas.
At the level of total aggregate consumption, the changes in the English
Christmas have been marked over the longer term. In the 17th century,
Christmas was banned by the Puritans in 1647 and revived in 1660 (though the
legalisation of festivities only partly restored its former glories).
The publication of A Christmas Carol by Charles Dickens in 1843 gave a new
boost to the festivities. It was in the 1840s that so much of current
Christmas tradition was established - trees, crackers, cards and so on.
For the retailing industry, however, the most important change in social
customs happened in the 1870s. Previously, presents had been given mainly to
children and mostly at New Year. But it began to be the practice to give
them at Christmas and to adults as well - to the benefit of almost the whole
range of the retailing business and industry. From that time on, the
commercial and social importance of Christmas continued to increase, a
process which the data suggest is still occurring.
Will this upward trend in Christmas spending continue? Studying historical
trends in consumption seasonality, there is considerable evidence that while
seasonality changes only very slowly, when it does change it changes
permanently. In other words, once new social customs are established, they
remain in force.
This suggests that the enhanced importance of Christmas to the retailer is
likely to remain, long after any temporary disappointment over this year's
sales has disappeared.
The author is a fellow of All Souls, Oxford, and is affiliated to the Centre
for Economic Performance at the London School of Economics -----------------------------------------------------------------------
CHRISTMAS SEASONAL EFFECTS -----------------------------------------------------------------------
UK seasonal growth in 4th quarter over 3rd quarter
Per cent                             1960      1970      1980      1990 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Non-durable                   4.2       5.0      5.15       6
Food                          2.8       2.4      2.0        2.6
Alcohol & tobacco             9.2      12.3     14.0       19.4
Other goods                  10.3      12.8     15.4       17.8
Energy                        6.1       7.2     11.3       11.6
Other services               -4.0      -4.3     -4.7       -2.8
Clothing & footwear          21.8      22.3     23.6       22.4 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
