
It takes just one blow of a steamboat whistle on the quay at New Orleans to
find yourself transported into the storybook past of the Mississippi
paddleboats. Like multi-tiered wedding cakes, they churned the muddy waters
with their giant wheels, transporting men in Sunday suits and women in
be-ribboned bonnets towards their dreams.
The Delta Queen is about to set off. The great red wheel starts churning and
a top-hatted man on deck taps out a reedy version of 'Toot toot tootsie,
goodbye' on the calliope (or steam organ), sending puffs of smoke out of its
shining brass pipes.
In Life on the Mississippi, Mark Twain wrote that it was every boy's
ambition to be a steamboat man. Generations of children brought up on his
books have fantasised about running away from home and following in
Huckleberry Finn's footsteps along the great, brown river.
For a not entirely modest sum, the Delta Queen Steamboat Company offers the
chance to slip away from modern-day stresses and live out that fantasy on
one of its two paddle-wheel steamboats. Some people prefer the Mississippi
Queen with such modern amenities as cinema and pool. But, for romantics,
there is no choice but its elderly relative, the Delta Queen.
Now in its 68th year of operations, the Delta Queen is the oldest steamboat
in the world offering cruises, and has been declared a US national historic
landmark. It is like a floating palace with teak-panelled state-rooms, brass
fittings and Tiffany-style stained glass. As a result, it is easy to imagine
the days when silk-clad ladies sat doing embroidery while the men played
poker in the for'ard bar.
The Delta Queen runs tours of between three and 12 days through America's
heartland. Wanting to do things properly, I opted for one called 'The Old
South', which promised to 'recapture the ambience and history of this
gracious way of life'.
The scenery on the 682-mile round trip from New Orleans to Vicksburg, on the
lower Mississippi, is disappointing. Known as the chemical corridor, the
banks are lined with refineries and petro-chemical plants spewing out yellow
smoke and thick oily globules. But you do not take a trip like this for the
sights.
Nor for the excitement. Progress is so stately that the boat is often
overtaken by cyclists. Fellow passengers tend to be over 65 and like wearing
name tags. For those who do not relish playing bingo or dressing up for
floozie parades, day-time activities consist of reading the daily
Steamboatin' Times and flying kites (which usually end up tangled in the
wheel).
Nights in the bar are spent listening to the quavery crooning of the
ever-smiling Charlotte Champagne or dancing in the Orleans room, where
tireless Bob Schad is a whizz on the banjo. But even the most energetic soon
settle into the slow rhythm on-board, punctuated by occasional sightseeing
stops and frequent large meals of local delicacies such as alligator and
catfish.
The main pastime is river-watching from one of the rocking chairs on deck.
TS Eliot called the Mississippi 'a great brown god', and it captivates
quickly. On waking in the mornings, we could see it at its most mysterious,
swathed in a low mist from which the tops of submerged trees poked through.
At night, under the silvery glow of a full harvest moon, it was almost
beautiful. But it was at its most soulful during the day, the Delta Queen
nosing through thick, chocolate-brown water which even the US Army Corps of
Engineers cannot control as, flush with spring rains, it changes course and
bursts banks to show that it is not to be messed with.
Known as Big Muddy, the Mississippi is the longest river in the US, draining
all or part of 31 states on its winding, 2,500-mile journey from the hills
of Minnesota to the Gulf of Mexico. It is also America's hardest-working
waterway, carrying 500m tons of cargo each year in enormous, snaking lines
of connected barges. These, as long as five football fields, tend to take up
the whole river as they round bends.
There is so much traffic that the Delta Queen's jovial Captain John Davitt
compares the river to 'driving on an interstate highway'. But while motorway
drivers may go faster than 7mph, they do not have sandbanks and floating
logs to contend with. Avoiding these obstacles, and the barges, requires
great skill from the river pilots who drive the steamboats. And becoming a
pilot is not easy: the licence is granted in 20-mile segments and those
applying have to draw, from memory, every turn of the river, sandbar, bridge
and buoy in that stretch.
The Delta Queen's stops are orchestrated to shield passengers from contact
with the 1990s, although it is hard to avoid the tin-roofed slums and
proliferation of riverboat casinos (to which many of the crew slip off).
On our first morning we moored at Oak Alley, a Greek revival-style,
antebellum plantation house painted candy pink and reached through a grass
alley of 300-year-old oaks so gnarled that the branches touch the floor and
meet overhead to make an archway. Inside the drawing room, a painted wooden
screen stands in front of the fire; it used to prevent beeswax make-up,
layered on to cover smallpox scars, melting into the ladies' laps.
Our next stops were St Francisville, a pretty town under a veil of Spanish
moss, and Natchez, home to more than half the country's millionaires in the
1850s. Louisiana was the centre of the plantation economy and the lower
Mississippi area is dotted with large, colonnaded houses, built mostly
between the late 18th century and the civil war to show off the wealth
generated by cotton, indigo, rice and sugar.
Every year, during March, many of these private mansions are opened to the
public to show off opulent (and often tasteless) interiors, plus gardens
resplendent with magnolia and dog rose blossoms. Their lavish settings, and
names like Rosedown or Nottoway, inspire romantic images of crinolined
belles and dashing beaux with waxed moustaches.
Finally, we came to Vicksburg, which is positioned on a steep bluff
overlooking the river. During the civil war it was a Confederate stronghold
defending the whole of the lower Mississippi. In May 1863, General Grant's
army marched on the town; when the Confederates refused to surrender, he
ordered his army to starve them out. The bloody siege lasted 47 days. Now,
in the immaculately-kept Battleground Park, the old cannons still point at
each other while red and blue markers show where the Yankee and rebel troops
fought.
Each stop we made was marked by a huge puff of steam and a frenzy of
calliope-playing. Locals or camera-toting tourists gathered on shore to wave
us off, recalling the 'Steamboat a' comin]' days of last century when
paddle-wheelers like this used to rule the river.
The Delta Queen was built in a Glasgow shipyard in the 1920s for the
Californian Transportation Co. Its owners poured Dollars 875,000 into
creating a four-tiered, balustraded beauty. Used initially as an overnight
dinner cruiser between Sacramento and San Francisco, the depression forced
its withdrawal from service until Pearl Harbour. Then, it was requisitioned
by the navy, painted grey and used as a troop transporter.
Since then, the Delta Queen has passed through various owners and overhauls.
It even survived congressional legislation passed to prevent the operation
of wooden boats after a tragic fire on a cruise-liner.
The most spectacular part of the boat is the engine room. Passengers are
welcome to see the pistons driving a 40ft-long Pitman arm connected to a
crankshaft which turns the 44-ton paddle wheel.
Every so often on steamboats, pressure from the boilers gets so high that it
has to be relieved through a safety valve - the origin of the expression
'letting off steam'. After a week being pampered on the Delta Queen, I can
think of no better place to do that.
Christina Lamb travelled with the Delta Queen Steamboat Co of 30 Robin
Street Wharf, New Orleans. Information: tel (800)-543 1949.
