
Recent trading successes, and indications of political goodwill, appear to
be breaking down the often intense and historic rivalry between New Zealand
and its resource-rich neighbour Australia.
Australians are showing increasing interest in the economic reform programme
in New Zealand, although it is acknowledged that political realities make it
unlikely that some of the tax and labour regulations will find their way
into law there. Investment flows between the countries are growing rapidly,
spurred by the trade pact, Closer Economic Relations (CER).
Signed in 1982, CER has been of immense importance to New Zealand. For
decades Australia, with Britain, was the major supplier of manufactured
goods. Trade traditionally ran two-to-one in Australia's favour, but today
it is in balance: each country increased its exports to the other by 12 per
cent last year.
New Zealanders are pressing Australia to further develop the agreement and
move towards a fuller integration of the two economies. But there was
disappointment in May, when some Australian officials argued that 'CER has
gone about as far as it can.' The Australians refuse to examine issues such
as harmonising taxation, matching manufacturing standards, and freeing up
mutual investment options.
After initial rapid progress, aviation reform also appears to have stalled.
The agreement has allowed Air New Zealand to establish a 'hub' in Brisbane,
to service the Asian market. This has proved of immense benefit to the
airline and created thousands of jobs in Queensland as Asian holidaymakers
flock in.
However, Australians have been slow to use the 'beyond rights' that they
gained to New Zealand in the reciprocal aviation deal. New Zealand is
anxious to see Ansett flying the Tasman Sea between the two countries.
Both countries seem to be ignoring one of the most delicate issues: rules of
origin. New Zealand manufacturers operate in a largely tariff-free
environment, and can buy raw materials, such as plastic, cheaply on the
world market. However, Australia retains import protection for its own
manufacturing goods. This situation appears to benefit New Zealand
manufacturers in selling to Australia, as it keeps up the price of
Australian inputs.
Rowland Crone, president of the New Zealand Manufacturers' Federation, says
action on these issues is a priority and would further strengthen CER trade
and economic ties. Behind Mr Crone's concern are statements by the
Australian prime minister, Paul Keating, who, in a visit to Thailand last
month, spoke of extending CER to the six Asean nations.
New Zealand officials are also keen to see freer trade between the two
blocs. However, Mr Crone argues that to compete equably with the dynamic
Asean countries, New Zealand and Australia must settle the remaining
outstanding issues between them over CER.
Political differences became intense in the mid-1980s, over defence,
highlighted by New Zealand's withdrawal from ANZUS, the pact with Australia
and the US. Since last year, relations have improved, following a state
visit to New Zealand by Mr Keating, who appears to have developed an
excellent relationship with the New Zealand prime minister, Jim Bolger.
In many areas, apart from trade, the ties are growing steadily stronger.
Defence links appear to have improved, and there is close liaison on police
and crime matters.
However, the Australians continue to keep a close eye on New Zealand. There
were grumbles in New Zealand after Australia's April budget: many people
complained that it contained a tax incentive measure that was expressly
aimed at encouraging companies to base their head offices and manufacturing
facilities in Australia rather than New Zealand.
This followed moves to New Zealand by a string of companies, to take
advantage of the lower tax, cost and wage structure. A major attraction was
the Employment Contracts Act, which has introduced greater flexibility in
wage bargaining but is labelled an anti-union measure in Australia.
Among companies moving to New Zealand, or expanding there, were Gillette,
Unilever, Johnson & Johnson and Alcatel, which supplies wiring systems for
the Australian car industry. All use New Zealand as a base to supply
Australia and Asia.
A recent study by Trust Bank found that major companies were coming to New
Zealand because of its low inflation. It found that costs were being held as
industry developed flexibility, and said productivity of New Zealand
industry had risen by 28 per cent in the five years to last December, using
no more staff or overtime hours.
A number of New Zealand companies are expanding in Australia. They include
Pacific Star, a subsidiary of Telecom New Zealand, which is a major supplier
to telecommunications equipment to the Queensland government and larger
companies; and the white-goods manufacturer Fisher and Paykel, which has
built a large plant in Queensland.
The growth of sales to Australia has been a factor in the surge of optimism
seen recently among New Zealand manufacturers. Business confidence is at its
highest level for two decades, and the Manufacturers' Federation believes
economic growth could touch 6 per cent by June, after years of running
between zero and 2 per cent a year.
In the year to December 31, the strengthening New Zealand economy led to the
creation of 42,000 jobs, of which 23,000 were fulltime positions in
manufacturing. Many more were created in allied industries that service the
manufacturing sector. The Statistics Department reported in March that
employment in the manufacturing sector was up 9.7 per cent.
The strength in manufacturing is spreading through the economy, and the
extra jobs and spending power is seen as a significant reason for the budget
surplus that is expected this financial year.
Yet all is not going New Zealand's way. Australia, for example, is winning
the trade war on the food front, where it appears to offer cheaper canned
and frozen processed items. Against this, New Zealanders have done well in
light engineering and steel and aluminium fabrication.
Gilbert Petersen, of the Manufacturers' Federation, says that, while there
is a feeling of confidence in the sector, there is no great sense of
security, with the knowledge that the Australians 'could run rings around us
if they wanted to', because their larger population leads to economies of
scale.
It is widely believed that any advantages New Zealand manufacturers have
gained are due to efficiencies learned the hard way, through surviving a
protracted and deep recession. They will battle to keep them, and make the
best possible use of the CER pact.
