
The discovery in Germany of weapons grade plutonium, believed to have been
smuggled in from Russia, has increased fears of a potentially dangerous
proliferation of nuclear material emanating from the former Soviet
republics.
In Bonn, Mr Bernd Schmidbauer, Chancellor Helmut Kohl's aide with
responsibility for the intelligence services, described the discovery, the
first time such material has been found in the west, as 'dramatic'.
In the US, one of the country's leading nuclear proliferation experts, Dr
William Potter, a director of the Monterey Institute in California, warned
that the find could be just the 'tip of the iceberg' involving a growing
business in illegally traded Soviet nuclear material.
One leading US scientist who has investigated the material said last night:
'This discovery is extraordinarily significant. It represents a change from
the hypothetical to proof.'
A senior European Union official yesterday confirmed that scientists had
only recently established beyond doubt that six grammes of the nuclear
material seized by German police at the beginning of May - a tenth of the
total - was highly enriched plutonium-239. The material was seized in a raid
on a garage in Tengen in southern Germany, near the Swiss border.
Analysis of the material was finalised by scientists working for the
European Commission at the end of June, leading to a flurry of
behind-the-scenes diplomatic activity, straddling the US, western Europe and
Russia.
The case was discussed at a special meeting of US, Russian and European law
enforcement officials in Germany earlier this week. Last night, the Foreign
Office said it was 'following up' the case with the German authorities
through the British embassy in Bonn. In Moscow, a spokesman for the Russian
external intelligence service denied the material originated from Russia.
However, Mr Wilhelm Gmelin, director of the EU Commission's Euratom
Safeguards non-proliferation agency, said: 'The data we have suggest it is
highly probable the material was manufactured at a Russian military site.'
US scientists, who together with police and western intelligence agencies
have been monitoring the case, believe the material may have been smuggled
out of the Kurchatov Atomic Energy Research Institute in Moscow or from a
research site known as Sverdlovsk 44 in the Urals.
Although the quantity is far too small to produce a weapon, there now
appears to be growing suspicions that it could belong to one of several
consignments which have evaded export controls and are yet to be discovered.
The German investigation is understood to have discovered unconfirmed
intelligence that the seized material may have been on its way to Iraq.
