
The German central bank will continue to rely on money supply as a key guide
to its monetary policy, but extra time may be needed to iron out recent
distortions, Mr Hans Tietmeyer, Bundesbank president, hinted last night.
The bank stood by the principle of its policy based on the M3 measure of
monetary growth, he said. This did not exclude consideration of the special
factors affecting M3, or fine-tuning including the 'time horizon'.
The issues would be discussed at the bank's mid-year M3 review next month,
he said at an international banking gathering in Frankfurt.
Mr Tietmeyer's comments suggest the bank is seeking to damp widespread
criticism that M3 has been discredited, that the bank's own credibility has
suffered as a result, and that the measure should be abandoned.
A recent study from Goldman Sachs, for example, attributed recent weakness
in bond markets partly to the Bundesbank's 'ambivalent' attitude towards M3
growth rates which this year have far exceeded its target range of 4-6 per
cent. In April, the measure was still growing at 15.4 per cent.
The bank had sharply reduced interest rates despite months of excessive
monetary growth, while at the same time continuing to stress the
inflationary dangers of growing liquidity.
The study said keeping the current target range unchanged until the end of
1995 was 'the only theoretically clean and credible solution' to the bank's
dilemma. The government's council of economic experts, the so-called 'five
wise men' has often suggested that the current practice of setting targets
for one year at a time should be dropped.
Extension of the 1994 target's time-scale would allow more time for the
absorption into long-term investments of excess liquidity currently
distorting the M3 data, and avoid the danger of a new 1995 target being
disrupted from the outset.
Although the 1995 M3 target is not due to be set until next December, the
central bank may now feel that markets need more reassurance than has been
available so far.
Until now, central bank officials have tended simply to insist that M3 must
stay. Mr Tietmeyer again stressed that money supply targeting remained a key
indicator in Bundesbank policy. Alternative strategies practised elsewhere
in countries which had given up targeting had yet to stand the test of time,
he added.
While admitting the bank could not calculate the precise effects of the
special factors distorting M3 at present, it was by no means in a state
which others had experienced in the past where it could no longer make any
sense of money supply growth, he added.
He was concerned that recent disruptions - starting back in 1990 with German
unification - seemed to have affected M3's capacity as an effective
indicator. But internal and external research had yet to suggest that the
long-term relationship between money supply and inflation had been altered.
Monetary targeting constituted a part of Germany's stability culture which
would not be easy to give up, he said.
