
It is lunchtime in Hanover Square in central London, and House of Hanover is
crowded with tourists filling their shopping carts with Walkers shortbread,
Wedgwood china and Twinings tea. A saleswoman rushes over to a man who has
wandered toward a rack of Burberrys raincoats. 'Excuse me sir, those coats
are for women,' she says, steering him to the men's side of the department.
'We have many stylish items,' she exclaims. 'They're very cheap.'
Actually, she said something more like: 'Suimasen, sochira wa josei na mono
desu. Kakkoii mono arismasu yo. Yasui desu yo.' For House of Hanover is not
just a run-of-the-mill souvenir shop. Along with several other such stores
in London, many with familiar Japanese department store names, it caters
almost exclusively for Japanese tourists.
Many of the staff in these shops are Japanese, as are 70 to 99 per cent of
their customers. The shops carry largely the same range of typical British
products, but the ethos in the stores is imported from home. At Igirisu-ya,
for example, formal announcements over the shop sound system thank the
shoppers for their patronage in formal Japanese, and bowing clerks murmuring
'Irasshaimase' ('Welcome to our store') can be seen in every department.
Shopping is an essential component of a Japanese trip abroad and according
to the British Tourist Authority, Japanese people regularly list good
shopping as a reason for coming to London. Japanese custom dictates that
travellers must bring back omiage - souvenirs - for everyone.
The Japanese are among the most generous spenders to visit England.
According to British Tourist Authority figures, the Japanese spend 16 per
cent less time in Britain than all other foreign visitors, but part with 37
per cent more money.
Although figures have not been compiled for 1993, the BTA estimates 580,000
visitors travelled to Britain from Japan, spending around Pounds 312m, up 8
per cent from 1992. The number of visitors has grown steadily since 1978.
Three main tour companies, Japan Travel Bureau, Nippon Travel and Miki
Travel, serve about 155,000 tourists a year between them. They deliver
clients to the Japanese shops at the end of half-day bus tours, sometimes
for just 20 frenzied minutes.
For those whose visits are brief - and a two-day stop is common - shopping
must be squeezed in between sightseeing, theatre-going and restaurant
hopping. The special Japanese shops make things easy: there are no language
barriers, they provide VAT refund services (Sogo in Piccadilly automatically
calculates the refund on the sales receipt, and the back of the receipt is a
customs form) and they accept yen for payment.
Many of the goods in the shops, although available in Japan, are as much as
70 per cent cheaper here. But according to Noriko Mogami, assistant manager
at Takashimaya: 'A lot of Japanese have a business-orientated mind and they
know a lot about how much things cost. As soon as they come into the shop
they bring out their calculators and if they think an item is not much
cheaper than it is in Japan, they won't buy it.'
While she spoke a Japanese mother and daughter huddled over a pile of
Ballantyne sweaters, punching the prices into their calculators. 'So Pounds
40 means Y7,000 . . . is that cheaper, do you think?' they murmured.
At House of Hanover, manager Koichi Nagashima said customers were now more
choosy. He said shodo-gai - impulse buying - was rare. 'They used to buy
things just because they were there. Now they are careful to buy what they
want.'
In recent years, Japanese tourists have become less content to jump on a bus
and be led to House of Hanover or Takashimaya.
Mogami said that although Japanese tourists used the speciality shops almost
exclusively 10 to 20 years ago, they are now more aware of other, more
'native' shopping attractions. She said many people were repeat travellers
who 'know where to go and and do not go to Japanese shops any more. They now
go to Sloane Square, Kings Road, Covent Garden and the markets.
'Now we are asked many times how to get to Camden or Portobello so we are
becoming a tourist information centre.'
As more travellers break away from the traditional package tour, shoppers
will branch out in their shopping habits.
Mami Tanaka, a university student, was travelling for nine days in London
with two friends. Although they went on one bus tour, they had been scouting
through Harrods, Marks and Spencer, Selfridge's, Laura Ashley and Liberty.
Staff at many high street shops frequented by Japanese tourists say they
considered them good customers. 'They are very polite,' said Miss Olga
Gasson, a sales clerk on the ladies' rainwear floor at the Burberrys Regent
Street store.
Some 42 per cent of Burberrys' sales come from Japanese tourists, and the
company makes special small sizes for Japanese bodies.
Liberty gives out extra bags to Japanese customers to use as gift wrap.
These stores also cater for Japanese shoppers by placing Japanese speakers
in their most popular outlets. Burberrys has three in its Haymarket store
and two in the Regent Street store.
Liberty on Regent Street employs one Japanese speaker and is teaching
several of its staff who work in the departments where Tana Lawn scarves,
fabrics and bags - very popular among Japanese women - are sold.
One of the most important phrases that staff are taught is 'Chodo ii' -
'That's perfect]'
