
Sir, Your editorial, 'A new target for inflation' (December 13), suggested a
number of modifications to the framework for monetary policy relating in
particular to the inflation target. You rightly focus on the question of how
to acquire the credibility for this target which, judging by prevailing
interest rate expectations and most inflation forecasts, has not yet been
fully achieved.
Since the RPIX inflation rate is currently higher than that of the RPIY, I
cannot believe that a move to a target which is now easier to hit is likely
to enhance credibility, although eventually a move to the RPIY definition
may be sensible.
Given that many forecasts, including our own at the National Institute,
would have inflation rising above 3 per cent in the next two years, it would
seem unwise to advocate a lowering of the ceiling of the target range to 3
per cent.
Even if the central forecast for inflation were to remain below this level,
we live in an uncertain world where discretion needs to be the better part
of valour. The tighter the inflation target, the more likely it is that some
unexpected occurrence may cause the target range to be violated. Or even for
unacceptably high output costs to be paid to keep the target range intact.
In such circumstances, the actual Treasury-Bank strategy of 'talking down'
inflation into the lower half of the range while maintaining the original
range of 1-4 per cent may actually be rather prudent.
Importantly, as you emphasise, the question of any future administration's
commitment to an inflation target has a crucial bearing on the long-term
credibility of anti-inflationary policy and can even influence its current
effectiveness. There now seems to be cross-party agreement on the role of
monetary policy in achieving low inflation. One possible area of confusion
may arise, however, with the Labour party's stated intention to a target for
growth. If this means that monetary policy will be actively used to raise
gross domestic product above its 'natural level', then inflation can indeed
be expected to be higher. Alternatively, if the growth target means that
supply side policies will be adopted in an attempt to increase the long-run
growth rate endogenously, to use a much maligned but ultimately rather
important expression, then the effects on inflation are much less certain
and may even be beneficial.
I echo your call for clarity on all sides.
Peter Westaway,
senior research fellow,
National Institute of Economic and Social Research,
2 Dean Trench Street,
Smith Square,
London SW1P 3HE
