
North Korea yesterday promised to release the body of a US air force crewman
killed in a helicopter crash inside its territory at the weekend, raising
hopes the surviving crewman might be able to return home for Christmas.
A Pyongyang official news agency statement saying the dead airman would be
handed over soon helped defuse growing tensions in North Korea's relations
with Washington.
North Korea's initial silence on the US request for its crewmen and
helicopter to be returned had raised fears the incident could scupper the
deal struck in October whereby North Korea agreed to dismantle nuclear
facilities that could be used for making weapons.
Mr Bill Richardson, the US congressman negotiating with the North Korean
government, said he expected to bring the remains of Chief Warrant Officer
David Hilemon to South Korea this morning.
US officials said Mr Richardson was optimistic that Chief Warrant Officer
Bobby Hall, who was unharmed but who has been held since the crash, would be
freed in time for Christmas. But North Korea said it was thoroughly
investigating the incident. 'A step will then be taken according to relevant
procedures,' the official news agency said.
The US has argued that the helicopter, well inside North Korean territory
when it came down, strayed over the border by accident. North Korea said it
'was shot down in a self-defensive measure'.
The crash comes at an awkward time. Pyongyang's decision-making is hampered
by uncertainty over the succession to the late President Kim Il Sung. The
North Korean military, believed to have reservations over the rapprochement
with the US, now has an excuse for back-pedalling.
Some analysts believe Pyongyang may also have wanted to use the incident as
a means of forcing the US to sign a formal peace treaty ending the Korean
war of the 1950s. The US believes this is a matter for North and South
Korea.
But Pyongyang's foot-dragging is fanning opposition in the US to the nuclear
deal under which North Korea is to receive financial aid and technology in
return for closing its heavy-water reactors.
