
A recovery in iron ore prices, which have been severely depressed for the
past three years, now seems imminent, according to government and industry
experts meeting in Geneva to review iron ore market developments.
The experts are predicting an upsurge in global steel production and
consequently in the world market for iron ore next year, following strong
demand in 1994. World iron ore exports are expected this year to rise by
more than last year's 8 per cent, when they totalled 398m tonnes.
This has not been enough so far to prevent another collapse in iron ore
prices, by nearly 20 per cent over 1993-94. Prices remain around 25-30 per
cent below the 1991 level, depressing export earnings despite higher
shipments. In 1993 iron ore trade transactions amounted to Dollars 7.55bn,
the lowest value since 1989, and in 1994 too lower prices are expected to
offset increased exports.
In 1995, however, the market is expected to improve sufficiently to push
prices up. Steel production is increasing all over the world, except in the
Commonwealth of Independent States and Africa, scrap prices are soaring and
demand for primary iron products is rising. The world supply of pellets and
lumps remains tight.
The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, sponsor of the
three-day meeting that ended yesterday, says low prices have not been
conducive to new greenfield projects but companies are continuing to invest
in replacement and expanded capacity to assure long-term supply.
Four major projects have started this year, in Mauritania, Brazil, Australia
and Venezuela. Other projects are under way in Australia, Chile, China,
India and Sweden.
Meanwhile, ownership concentration in the iron ore industry is increasing,
according to Mr Magnus Ericsson, of Sweden's Raw Materials Group. He told
the meeting that the production share of the three biggest iron ore
companies had risen from 19 per cent in 1975 to 34 per cent in 1993. Cia
Vale do Rio Doce, a state-owned Brazilian producer, leads the field,
followed by Broken Hill of Australia and Britain's RTZ.
Mr Ericsson said this defied the trend to deconcentration in most of the
main non-ferrous minerals and metals markets. He attributed the difference
to the huge size of the iron ore industry and the potential for scale
economies, the presence of big deposits of high-grade ores and steep cost
barriers to entry.
Mr Ericsson noted that steel companies had weakened their grip on the iron
ore industry, with only four steel companies among the top ten producers.
The top 20 iron ore mining companies now included three Chinese, three
Russian, two Ukrainian and one Kazakh, he pointed out.
