
The British Labour party conference was not the only place where people were
arguing furiously this week about private versus public ownership. The
international meeting on human genes in Washington DC was equally divided by
debate over whether genetic information should be freely available in the
public domain, or the private property of the researchers who patent it
first.
Each side claims that its favoured system will accelerate the application of
genetic discoveries to human health, in the form of treatments and
diagnostic tests for diseases from cancer to mental illness.
Arguments over gene ownership have bedevilled biotechnology and medical
research for several years. They are now reaching a new intensity, as
scientists realise how much the private sector is coming to dominate the
race to discover the 100,000 genes which control human development and
susceptibility to disease.
The biomedical research leaders who launched the grandiose Human Genome
Project in the late 1980s as a Pounds 2bn international effort to decode all
DNA (the chemical store of genetic information) expected it to take about 15
years and to be funded largely by governments. In fact biotechnology
companies, in partnership with the established pharmaceutical industry, are
spending more on genetics research than the traditional public bodies such
as the US National Institutes of Health and the UK Medical Research Council -and, by taking scientific short cuts, they are producing results more
quickly.
However, the debate is not simply between academic and industrial
researchers. Within each group, opinions are divided on the merits of
patenting genes, as two of the world's largest drugs companies, Merck and
SmithKline Beecham, showed this week when they announced diametrically
opposed policies on the issue.
Merck said it would establish a comprehensive database of genetic
information to which everyone, including commercial competitors, will have
open access. The company will provide several million dollars for Washington
University in St Louis, one of the top US genetics labs, to create new data
for the so-called Merck Gene Index.
'This will facilitate progress in biomedical research by reducing
duplication of effort, speeding the identification of disease-related genes
and enhancing the probability of breakthrough drug discoveries,' says Dr
Edward Scolnick, Merck's head of research.
Although the company's announcement was couched in terms of
self-congratulatory altruism, some competitors saw it as more of a spoiling
move to make up for the fact that Merck had been slow to appreciate that
genetic discoveries could transform pharmaceutical research.
On the other hand SmithKline Beecham, until recently one of the sleepier
pharmaceutical giants, has moved astonishingly quickly to feed genetic
information into its mainstream research since linking up with Human Genome
Sciences, the leading biotech company specialising in gene discovery, in May
1993. SB is paying HGS Dollars 125m over 10 years for an equity stake and
exclusive access to its private database, which already contains partial or
complete DNA sequences of about one-third of all human genes.
The key to HGS's success is a short-cut called cDNA (complementary DNA)
sequencing. This fishes out from particular body tissues (eg the brain)
pieces of DNA corresponding to genes that are active there. It gives a
library of gene fragments written in the four letters of the genetic code -
C A T G - rather like an index of first lines in a poetry book. Most
sequences are distinctive enough for scientists to understand their meaning.
In Washington this week SB and HGS made clear that they had no intention of
allowing others unrestricted access to the database, which they believe
gives them a huge competitive advantage for future product development. At
the same time they revealed the terms under which academic researchers would
be allowed to use the database. The main condition is that HGS will have
first rights to exploit any patentable discovery they make.
'The conditions that govern access to these data should preserve the
incentive for the private sector to invest the funds necessary to bring new
drugs and diagnostic products to the market,' says Dr William Haseltine, HGS
chief executive. 'Unalloyed dumping of genetic information into the public
sector is not in the best interests of the public.'
Dr Michael Morgan of the London-based Wellcome Trust, the world's largest
medical research charity, brought together all interested parties in a
fringe meeting at this week's Washington conference, to try to work out a
consensus for future action.
'The HGS/SB proposal may well be acceptable to academia, though we shall
have to study the terms carefully,' Dr Morgan says. 'But they are not giving
access to the pharmaceutical industry, so there is enormous support from the
other drug companies for a public domain database.'
Dr Morgan says his meeting agreed that Merck's proposal should form the
basis of an international effort to identify as many individual genes as
possible and 'map' the position of each gene on one of the 23 chromosomes
that carry all human DNA. The mapping stage is essential for understanding
how the genes work.
Glaxo, the largest UK drug company, would be happy to join in too, says Dr
Barry Ross, research director, 'if this can be developed into a full
partnership between industry and academia, rather than something run by
Merck with the Merck name on it'.
Everyone involved in genetics research agrees that patent protection is
needed at some stage to provide the financial incentive for companies to
turn the science into products. The contentious question really is: at what
point in the R&D process should patents take effect to end the sharing of
public information and stimulate product development?
SB, HGS and other biotechnology companies whose competitive advantage is in
creating genetic information want patents to take effect as early as
possible. Merck, Glaxo and other large drug companies believe that patents
should not operate 'until you have a gene-based product to protect', as Dr
Ross puts it.
Academics' views depend mostly on whether they are involved with biotech
companies seeking to exploit genetic information. Last month's decision by
the University of Utah and Myriad Genetics, a US biotech company, to patent
their discovery of a gene causing breast cancer provoked a hostile reaction
from researchers who said it would destroy future collaboration in the
search for cancer genes.
Overshadowing the debate is confusion about the way patent law applies to
genetic discoveries. Rulings by the US Patent Office and its European
counterparts have been contradictory and not yet tested in court. It will
not be known for many years what level of genetic information can be
protected. Will it be a fragment of a gene, the full human gene, or the gene
incorporated into a potential product?
Wherever the line is eventually drawn, it is already clear that the old
academic ideal of open scientific collaboration unmotivated by commercial
gain is as out of date as the Labour party's Clause 4.
