
Germany's vaunted M3, the money supply indicator which the Bundesbank
unreservedly recommends to a monetarily-unified Europe as the world's
trustiest monetary early warning system, has once again fallen foul of
'special factors'.
After ending 1993 at a peak, with an annualised growth rate of 8.1 per cent,
more than 1.5 points above the top of its designated target range, M3
attained a stratospheric 20.6 per cent in January - almost 15 points off the
mark.
The figure, released yesterday, coming on top of bad inflationary vibrations
from the US and fears of rising interest rates, had a dramatic effect on
financial markets. However, Bundesbank directors had already warned that
1994's early figures would be distorted. Furthermore, they made their first
cut in the securities repurchase rate since early December only one day
before releasing the January M3 balloon. It is safe to assume, therefore,
that Germany's policymakers attach little importance to the figure - at
least for the time being.
It is equally safe to assume, economists agreed yesterday, that the
Bundesbank will continue its softly-softly progress on reducing interest
rates. This week's 0.03 percentage point slice off the repo rate at which it
supplies short-term liquidity to the market was widely read as a signal that
further reductions in short-term rates are still on the cards.
The rate at which they come is a different matter. The 'special factors'
which caused January's inflation of M3 are understood still to be lingering -liquidity parked in short-term deposits in expectation of rising long-term
rates and heavy borrowing by house-buyers concerned to pre-empt any interest
rate rises. So it could be some time before the reality of M3 coincides with
the lines on the central bank's graphic prognostications for the year.
This is not to say that the routine M3 figures offer observers an especially
clear guide to the Bundesbank's course of action.
The current rate-cutting process started in September 1992, when M3 was
above target and rising. Since then the short-term discount lending rate has
been cut eight times, even though M3 has consistently exceeded its corridor
range apart from the first three months of last year, when a rush of funds
overseas to avoid a new withholding tax caused a dip. The reversal of that
rush was one of the 'special factors' contributing to January's monetary
surge.
A better guide, and the one on which economists base much of their optimism,
is the west German inflation rate and the medium-term outlook for prices.
Allowing for a blip in January, when new taxes and increased administered
prices pushed the rate ahead, month-on-month inflation has been rising at
around 0.2 per cent a month for the past year. Last month the annual rate
was down to 3.3 per cent, continuing a steady decline which has continued
for more than 12 months. Prices of goods, excluding services and
administered prices, rose just 2.3 per cent in the whole of last year.
Significantly, one state, Bavaria, this week announced an overall annual
inflation rate of 2.9 per cent - the lowest for three years.
At the same time the federal statistics office reported a real 1.6 per cent
fall in blue-collar gross earning, the first cut since 1983 and a clear
indicator of fading inflationary pressure from the demand side. This was
underlined yesterday by reports that retail sales last year fell a real 4
per cent, with the retailers' association expecting no improvement in 1994.
Despite disturbances caused by striking engineers and public sector workers,
confidence remains strong that the year's pay rounds will end once again
with real reductions in wages and salaries.
The Bundesbank, not given to extravagant optimism, has repeatedly said it
expects 2-point-something inflation by the year's end, within striking
distance of the 2 per cent it regards as price stability.
But it has other indicators in its sights. While it has openly supported the
government's view that pan-German economic growth of up to 1.5 per cent is
attainable this year, it also has to consider widespread opinions that the
advance will be far smaller and will in any case rely almost totally on the
continued revival of external demand for German goods and services. This
will depend partly on a steady feed of interest rate reductions, to
encourage recovery and maintain a D-Mark exchange rate at which German
exports remain affordable.
Considering this week's turbulent market conditions, the last thing expected
from today's Bundesbank council meeting is a resumption of interest rate
reductions. As several economists suggested, the members might usefully
spend the time assessing whether M3 is all it is cracked up to be, or at
least preparing a sound rationale for their claims that its rightful role is
to be the guiding light of a future common European monetary policy.
