
Mother Nature has scorched her poor gardeners all summer and, as the end of
the season approaches, she is now softening them up with a kinder
postscript.
Gentle rain and intermittent sunshine show September at its best. They also
give us a chance for useful action, while enjoying the one high-class
performer in this testing year.
Perhaps it has been the heat, perhaps it is the passing of its seventh year,
but my evergreen magnolia Grandiflora, planted in 1987, has at last put
lesser companions to shame.
Never be shy of planting these heroic trees against a sunny wall when you
start a garden. Mine has had 14 flowers this summer, four of them open
simultaneously as I write.
The myth that they need 10 years to flower in Britain is irrelevant. Better
forms have speeded the process.
As yet, The Plant Finder, the Hardy Plant Society's list of more than 55,000
plants, lists only one source for the Maryland cross, which will flower in
its third year; experts now speak equally well of Saint Mary, but I am happy
with my usual Exmouth variety which is recognisable by its narrow leaves and
flowers with smaller, more widely-spaced, white petals.
They last for a long weekend and then the lemon-scented flowers turn brown
like suede and start to drop. Blame their fall on the beetles who find their
way into the flowers and pollinate them, their primeval duty since the years
before the earth's last ice age. Who can be cross with the beetles when the
slightest cooling on a September evening releases the scent which draws
everyone to it?
Grandiflora owners must soon decide whether to choose clear daylight through
their ground-floor windows or whether to leave their magnolia to grow
sideways on the wall outside and obscure the light. These magnolias grow
furiously and I will soon be hidden behind evergreens, lost to the world
beneath a pre-glacial canopy.
Next spring, the magnolia will have to be pruned. Meanwhile, we should all
be using the weekend on our evergreen backbones: those hedges and shapes of
yew and box. Now is exactly the right moment to clip and train them because
their sap is running less freely and their growth will be less delayed by
being stopped.
Arm yourself with some bamboo canes, a ball of string and a sharp pair of
hand shears. Fix the canes at intervals down the front of a young hedge,
tapering them inwards slightly to give the slope, or batter, of a
well-groomed hedge. Traditionally you should allow an inward slope of one
inch to each foot of height. Stretch lengths of string along the canes and
then cut the hedging back to its line, striking firmly so that you do not
leave split ends.
I hate cutting anything and would have disappeared by now in an undisturbed
jungle if visitors' expectations did not force me to give hedges a shape.
This year, the clipping of yew has taken on a new attraction: it is our
chance to be useful and contribute to the nation's health.
You probably know the feeling of wistful waste when you are left with piles
of green yew clippings, too early in the autumn to be used in winter
decorations. It always seems sad to cremate them, but now you can send them
off for research.
At Old House Farm, Stubbs Walden, Doncaster, Yorkshire, John Cook and his
family have been farming 1,200 acres for nearly 40 years.
Since 1991, their company, Friendship Estates, has branched out from green
herbs into yew clippings: they travel all over Britain to collect them,
blow-dry them and send them to be milked for their vital extract, known as
10-DAB III.
When purified, this extract becomes docetaxel, a current favourite in cancer
research, where high hopes are held for its medical worth.
Friendship Estates will come to your garden for the clippings of at least 50
yards of yew hedging. It has 300 customers already and, in its third year,
is collecting more than 100 tonnes of yew clippings. Fax on 0302-700958 or
telephone on 0302-700200 if you have enough yew to help. It is a prompt
collector and has swept up the crumbs from the academic yews in a nearby
Oxford college already.
One hope for docetaxel is in the treatment of breast cancers, among others.
Clippings should be stored in a cool and shady place to a maximum depth of
9in until they are collected. Friendship Estates will lend appropriate bags
and cool air fans to customers with a serious length of yew on offer.
It has been an awful year for hedge funds, but I feel it is up to the
gardening column to name one which will actually turn out to have some
value.
If only the doctors would come up with a use for the leaves of my magnolias.
Then it would not be so hard to cut them, too, let in the daylight and tell
myself that I was striking a blow for a longer life.
