
Five years ago coffee and cocoa farmers worldwide were leaving crops to rot
in the fields after a spectacular collapse in commodity prices. Today, the
picture is different as prices for 'soft' commodities such as coffee, sugar
and cocoa are surging, encouraging financial investors to turn their
attention to these previously unsophisticated markets.
Prices have been buoyed by crop difficulties, rising consumption and
declining world stocks for coffee and cocoa. The end to the recession in
many countries is expected to fuel demand.
Rising prices and an upturn in speculative interest in the soft commodity
markets has resulted in financial investors returning to commodities after
an absence of several years.
'New capital is increasingly focused on commodities and this is reflected by
growing exchange membership among international finance houses and banks,'
says Mr Robin Woodhead, chief executive of the London Commodity Exchange.
Poor returns expected on world bond markets have also encouraged
institutional investors to put cash into commodities. Even the metals
markets, where world stocks remain high, are benefiting from renewed
interest in basic commodities.
But it is not just speculation that is fuelling this year's rise in the soft
commodity markets. Coffee, cocoa and sugar crops are all expected to be
lower than forecasts for world consumption leading to a deficit, to be made
up from stockpiles.
Cocoa prices reached a five-year high at the end of last year with prices
breaching Pounds 1,000 a tonne on the London Commodity Exchange after
forecasts of a growing shortfall in production. Prices remain firmly above
Pounds 950 a tonne and production is expected to be between 120,000 and
170,000 tonnes lower than consumption.
The International Sugar Organisation last week revised its deficit forecast
to 2.4m tonnes this year - just over 2 per cent of world consumption - from
1.4m tonnes in December.
Prices have risen by almost 20 per cent for both raw and white sugar with
the May futures contract at New York's Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange
reaching over 12 cents per lb last week.
Similarly, coffee prices hit their highest level for 19 months last week
when the LCE's second position futures contract touched Dollars 1,341 a
tonne. Coffee prices have also received a boost from the operation of a
producers' retention scheme.
Last October, 40 coffee-producing countries put together a plan to withhold
up to 20 per cent of supplies from the export market until prices increased.
This followed a dramatic collapse in the coffee market when prices fell to
their lowest level since 1974.
The retention scheme has been successful in adding to investors' fears of a
squeeze on stocks.
Goldman Sachs, the US investment bank, works out production costs for
commodities each month. This shows a price below which it is not economic to
continue production. By this measure, commodity prices overall are 7 per
cent undervalued when compared with the costs of production.
Cocoa prices are 5 per cent below the costs of production and sugar prices 4
per cent lower. However, Goldman reckons coffee prices are 15 per cent
higher than production costs as the producers' retention scheme has begun to
bite.
Goldman points out that the low valuation of some commodities makes them a
good investment opportunity.
But not everyone is happy about the appearance of futures funds and
speculators in the traditionally gentlemanly commodity markets. The extra
cash can exaggerate a market move and some traders complain that the soft
commodity markets are becoming dominated by fund activity.
'Funds can push a market, but it is not the case that these markets are
bucking fundamental trends,' said Mr Lawrence Eagles, commodity analyst at
GNI, the London brokerage house.
