
Halifax, the UK's biggest building society, yesterday intensified already
fierce price competition in the household insurance sector by announcing
cuts averaging 20 per cent for building cover from next year.
The move threatens to accelerate falls in household insurance premiums and
reduce the profitability of the UK's main insurers.
Shares in Sun Alliance, which provides about 75 per cent of the household
insurance policies Halifax sells, ended 13p lower last night at 300p. Royal
Insurance, another large household insurer, saw its shares fall 9p to 279p.
Halifax's decision may also increase competition among building societies
which have traditionally profited from high commissions on insurance
policies sold with mortgages. Next year, new rules are expected to allow
building societies to offer their own insurance products.
By refining risk assessment methods, Halifax says some building insurance
rates may drop by up to 60 per cent.
Sun Alliance, which appears to have been forced by Halifax into accepting
the price cuts, said the falls were in line with market trends and only
affected about a third of its Halifax business.
The group is estimated to have achieved a profit margin of about 30 per cent
on its Halifax building insurance business - thanks largely to fewer claims.
Other insurance companies said Halifax was cutting rates from a high level.
Mr Peter Wood, chief executive of Direct Line, the telephone-based insurer,
said: 'We remain lower in price on all examples they give . . . This move is
a desperate attempt by the Halifax to slow the flood of insurance customers
abandoning the building societies.'
But the fear in the insurance sector is that Halifax's premium cuts will
trigger cuts for other insurance products. 'Our fear must be that
differentials will be maintained and that it is not just this line of
business that will be under pressure,' said Mr John Chester, analyst at SG
Warburg.
Halifax said its move reflected competitive pressures, though there was no
'massive haemorrhaging' of its building insurance book. In total, the
society has 1.4m household insurance policies.
Lex, Page 16
Merger go-ahead, Page 19
London stocks, Page 36
