
MTV Networks, the US-based pop music television programming company, is to
launch two wholly-owned channels for the Asian market in the fourth quarter
of this year, ending its relationship with Star TV, the Asian satellite
television company controlled by Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation.
MTV, a subsidiary of entertainment group Viacom, began broadcasting in Asia
in 1991 over the Star TV network with a freely available pan-regional
English-language service.
Its advertiser-supported independent service will be launched on the Apstar
One satellite, giving access to 18 countries, and will move to the more
powerful Apstar Two, to be launched next year, which will expand its access
to 30 countries.
One of the networks will be an English language one directed at young people
in south Asia, the Philippines and other countries. The second will be
Mandarin language service, encrypted so viewers will require a decoder to
receive programmes, aimed at countries such as China, Taiwan and Singapore.
MTV's decision to tackle the Asian market independently brings the region
into line with Europe, the US and Latin America, where the group has also
adopted a go-it-alone policy.
Mr Tom Freston, chairman of MTV Network, said: 'The Asian marketplace has
enormous potential and is still in the early stages of its development.'
Star, which is retaining several of MTV's screen celebrities, will continue
to broadcast music with a new service of its own. Programming will split
into two versions, one in Mandarin serving China, Taiwan and Hong Kong and
the other in English covering India, the Middle East and south-east Asia.
It says its changes 'herald a revolution in music television'. But analysts,
who are taking an increasingly dim view of Mr Murdoch's Dollars 525m
acquisition of 63.6 per cent of the broadcaster last summer, regard it as
further evidence that Star is still groping for direction.
Star is reckoned to be losing around Dollars 60m - Dollars 80m a year. Last
month it axed the BBC in what was seen as a sweetener gesture to China, a
market Star is keen to develop.
