
There is an office in Crawley, Sussex, that deals in dream tickets. Every
day it books 2,000 of them, free, to destinations all over the world.
The Air Miles company last year had a turnover estimated at Pounds 60m. Yet
last month, Mr Keith Mills and Mr Liam Cowdrey, the creators of Air Miles,
sold their 49 per cent stake in Air Miles Travel Promotions to British
Airways, which now owns the whole scheme.
The administration of the scheme is complex. Companies pay the Air Miles
company for vouchers; it pays British Airways for flights; British Airways
earns revenue on its unfilled seats; companies offering Air Miles increase
their market share; and customers - who save up points through the vouchers -get free flights.
The appeal for BA may lie in the fact that only 8 per cent of the British
population has begun to collect Air Miles. The rise has been rapid - for a
product dreamt up seven years ago on a train from London to Liverpool - but
the potential is huge.
In Canada, unlike in the UK, an Air Miles scheme launched two years ago does
not include a frequent-flyer scheme, where regular travellers are awarded
bonus flights. But Air Miles are now being collected by 37 per cent of
Canadians.
BA aims to invest heavily in attracting loyalty among general consumers,
with Air Miles issued against an increasing range of products. The scheme is
exclusive to companies within a product area - with, for example, only one
petrol retailer or one credit card offering Air Miles. But the variety of
products in the scheme is still narrow.
Air Miles will not renew contracts with companies if it has received
complaints about their quality of service.
There have been fears that growth in Air Miles would be constrained by the
number of empty airline seats. This is not the case, says BA. The 2.75bn Air
Miles held by customers in the UK would fill just 10 per cent of its empty
seats, it says.
Meanwhile, Messrs Mills and Cowdrey have retained their intellectual
copyright, and control over the international operation. In September, they
plan to launch Air Miles in another European country, thought to be the
Netherlands.
'The astonishing thing about Air Miles is that no one has copied it,' says
Mr Mills. 'It has so much more going for it than a standard frequent-flyer
scheme, which incurs all of the cost, but gets none of the revenue for the
airline.'
The use of Air Miles as an incentive for employees is an incidental
sideline, says Mr Mills. Air Miles issued by employers count as a taxable
perk, whereas there are no plans to tax ordinary Air Miles, which are
classed with other consumer incentives such as 10p off, or a free glass.
In the meantime, he says, he still gets a tingle when he sees people at
aiport check-in counters with Air Miles baggage tags. 'First-time users
never cease to be astonished and delighted that it works. There are no
catches, it is easy, they get real tickets and they pay no money,' he says.
