
Emperor Akihito of Japan starts his first imperial visit to the US today
with a mixture of friendship and sad wartime memories on his mind.
The emperor's 17-day tour will end with a poignant reminder of Japan's
ambiguous feelings over its wartime record. In this there is a parallel with
Germany's uncomfortable complexes over the recent D-Day landing
celebrations. For Japan the equivalent will come under the spotlight next
year, the 50th anniversary of the end of the Pacific war.
As the Normandy surf erases the tracks of Europe's D-Day celebrations,
Emperor Akihito will stop in Hawaii on his way home to lay a wreath at the
US national memorial cemetery of the Pacific, the Punch Bowl.
The emperor's gesture, to the sadness of some in Washington, falls short of
the Japanese government's original plan for him to visit the USS Arizona
memorial in Pearl Harbour, a battleship sunk by the Japanese attack on
December 7 1941. That idea was dropped because of fierce objections from
Japanese right-wing politicians and commentators, many of whom believe the
1941 attack was unavoidable, maybe even justified.
Officially, the emperor is so mystically elevated that he must get less
involved in temporal affairs than his high profile counterparts in the
British or Spanish royal families.
So he politely declined last week to comment on whether or not the Pearl
Harbour attack could be justified, beyond saying that the war lay heavy on
his heart. 'It is very important to understand historical truths correctly,
but because of my position, I must refrain from touching on this kind of
subject,' he said.
Yet at the same time, Emperor Akihito has deliberately descended just a
little closer to earth than his father, Hirohito, a mark of the gradual
evolution of the world's oldest unbroken imperial dynasty.
Emperor Akihito was the first to ascend the Chrysanthemum throne, in 1989,
as a human symbol of the state, rather than a god. His father, Hirohito was
born the Son of Heaven, but was obliged by the US occupiers after the war to
renounce his divinity.
As such, Emperor Akihito appears to be trying to play a subtle, yet emotive
role in shaping Japan's attempt publicly to come to terms with its wartime
past, the prerequisite for success in its campaign to become a fully fledged
member of the international community.
In this, the Emperor is in tune with a gathering mood of wartime regret in
mainstream Japan, in line with his traditional role of embodying the
national spirit. Former prime minister Mr Morihiro Hosokawa's
unprecedentedly explicit apologies over Japan's wartime record and the
recent re-writing of school textbooks to include more detail of that record
are the latest signs of this.
While feelings of atonement are on the rise, there is certainly no common
view on war history, one of the several areas in which fault lines are
appearing in Japan's famous consensus.
There is a dangerous nationalist minority, as shown by the recent gun attack
against Mr Hosokawa by a right-wing protestor, angered at his wartime
apologies. The denial two months ago by a justice minister that an infamous
wartime atrocity never happened, damaged Tokyo's increasingly vital Asian
relations. The minister resigned, but the suspicions he aroused will be hard
to soothe.
To some, the significance of Emperor Akihito's role as a public figure is
ambiguous, as shown by the response of Mr Shintaro Ishihara, a right-wing
member of the opposition Liberal Democratic party, to the aborted Pearl
Harbour visit.
'I have never heard of a US president visiting the memorial hall in
Hiroshima,' he said, drawing a temporal comparison. Yet Mr Ishihara a moment
later elevated Emperor Akihito to semi-divinity. 'The emperor is the only
priest king in the world. I think it is good for the emperor to be mystical.
If the emperor is not mystical, he will no longer be eternal,' he argues.
The emperor has in the first five years of his reign worked hard to
contribute, as a globe trotting ambassador, to Japan's temporal interests.
He has already visited the US twice in his official capacity as Crown
Prince. His father made the trip once.
Two years ago, Emperor Akihito became the first Japanese emperor to visit
China, so helping to clear the way for closer economic and diplomatic links.
At the time, he pleased the Chinese government by saying he 'deeply
deplored' the suffering caused during the Japanese occupation. He stopped
short of apologising.
Earlier this year, Emperor Akihito and Empress Michiko paid the first
imperial visit to the war memorial of Iwo Jima, a small Pacific island where
many thousands of US and Japanese were killed. He carefully referred, at the
time, to the dead of both sides.
Akihito hopes that the US visit will, as the one to China did, bring closer
ties. Of course he refrains from noting that his US tour is most timely,
just as a growing number of senior Tokyo government officials are getting
anxious that the strain in trade relations might spill over into political
and security relations.
Accordingly, the imperial couple have accepted a punishing schedule,
including 11 cities, starting in Atlanta today. They proceed to Washington
tomorrow, where they will be the guests of honour on Monday at the first
full state dinner of Bill Clinton's presidency, a protocol compliment that
will not be lost on Japan's humble emperor.
