
Internet devotees will get a gleam in their eye as they extol the joys of
'surfing the net' - the practice of wandering through the millions of data
bases, files and message groups proliferating on this self-regulating global
web of computer networks and electronic mail systems.
Travellers in this virtual world will tell you that almost anything is
available on the Internet. Sitting at their desks hacking away at their
keyboards, they can access recipes, copies of national legislation or, if
they're lucky, soul mates.
Lately, some Internet users have been able to find copies of word-processing
programs or computer games. Some software is put on the system as
'freeware', information that is in the public domain.
However, copies of commercial software are also available, without their
high street price tags. For less than the cost of an international phone
call, users are able to log on and download programs from the Internet on to
their own computers.
Software authors, the companies that sell the programs and governments view
the growing practice of exchanging copyrighted software via the Internet as
computer piracy.
In a case now before the courts in the US, the US Attorney's office in
Boston, Massachusetts has indicted David LaMacchia, a student at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, for conspiring to make an estimated
Dollars 1m in copyrighted business and entertainment computer software
available on the Internet.
Between November 1993 and January 1994, LaMacchia, who is charged with
criminal wire fraud, is said to have operated a bulletin board service out
of MIT computer work stations. He is alleged to have invited users around
the world to post commercial software on to the bulletin board for exchange
with other users.
The case, which is up for further pleadings at the end of this month,
exposes the difficulty of prosecuting crimes under copyright infringement
and fraud laws which were not set up to deal with developments in electronic
communication.
LaMacchia is protesting his innocence on the grounds that he did not
personally copy any software on to the Internet bulletin board but merely
operated the system in which others made copies.
'He is no more liable for what people do on the system than somebody who
runs a telephone network is liable for what people say on the telephone,'
said Harvey Silverglate, a Boston attorney representing LaMacchia.
Catching those who actually copied software from LaMacchia's bulletin board
could be almost impossible. 'You may not know who the people who are copying
the material are, or where they are from,' said Mark Sherwood-Edwards, a
solicitor at Simon Olswang in London. 'It would be difficult to say where
the copyright infringement took place. Right now the laws are jurisdictional
but the Internet is global.'
LaMacchia's lawyers believe the case should be dismissed because to try him
would entail 'stretching and mangling' US law. They claim LaMacchia's
alleged activities on the Internet are not covered by the criminal statutes
for copyright infringement or wire fraud.
Harvard Law School professor Laurence Tribe, a specialist in US
constitutional law and the legal ramifications of technology, said
inadequacy of current laws to deal with copyright infringement on the
Internet did not 'in principle create rights to free software'.
On the other hand, he said LaMacchia's case was being manipulated to fit
existing statutes. 'It seems like they are trying to fit a square into a
round hole,' he said. 'I think the situation calls for action at the
legislative level, rather than on a case by case trial.'
Software companies, however, believe they can cut down on Internet piracy by
going after individual cases. 'Last week we took down an Internet bulletin
board where our software was being copied,' said Harrison Colter, a lawyer
for Novell, a software manufacturer which recently merged with Wordperfect.
The companies know that such policing will not get rid of software piracy
altogether. 'No one is naive enough to believe that copyright infringement
can be eradicated from the Internet,' said Ed Morin, head of Novell's
anti-piracy team. 'But we will aggressively go after pirates, and if they
think they can get away with it they need to know what the penalties can be.
It could be jail time or heavy civil fines.'
