
Competition between British Telecommunications and Mercury, its main rival,
is set to intensify following a report by BT claiming that its service is
cheaper not only for typical home users but also for many high-volume users.
Mercury disputed some of the figures and pointed to its own discount
packages - but analysts saw the BT move as increasing the pressure on
Mercury to cut its prices further to retain a competitive edge.
The BT report, verified by consultants Coopers and Lybrand, claimed that
even residential customers with phone bills substantially above Pounds 75 a
quarter - Mercury's target market - are typically better off sticking with
BT than switching to its rival for long-distance and international calls.
The figures are based on what BT claims are typical calling patterns, and
include the range of discounts available to BT customers which Mercury
usually disregards when making its own pricing claims of 'guaranteed'
savings over BT.
The figures also assume that Mercury customers continue to make their local
calls via BT. Mercury has no local network and advises its customers to use
BT for local calls.
Analysts highlighted the comparison with the US, Australia and New Zealand,
where new telecoms companies competing with dominant operators have come
under increasing pressure as their initial success has forced the local
'giant' to cut its prices and market itself more effectively.
Mr Laurence Heyworth, telecoms analyst at Robert Fleming, the brokers, said:
'Mercury is now under such pressure that it cannot afford to maintain the
same price differentials as in the past.'
BT has been forced to cut its prices sharply by Oftel, the telecoms
regulator. Over this year its prices will have fallen by an average of about
12 per cent before taking account of inflation. Each BT price cut puts
pressure on its competitors to follow suit.
Mr Michael Hepher, BT managing director, said: 'This review compares like
with like, matching our best deal with their best deal, and we are better.'
Mercury said: 'The fact remains that Mercury's calls cost less than BT's
calls and for typical Mercury customers we beat BT hands down.'
