
Mr Hans Tietmeyer, the Bundesbank president, yesterday reinforced
expectations that German interest rates could fall again in the autumn by
saying that growth in money supply was lower than unadjusted figures suggest
and that inflation was heading in the right direction.
Mr Tietmeyer, speaking after a mid-year review of the bank's M3 measure of
money supply, indicated that the German central bank was relying less than
usual for policy guidance on its volatile M3 indicator. The distinction
between money which could potentially fuel inflation (the normal M3
constituents) and funds invested for the long-term had become less clear, he
said.
But the Bundesbank would not give up M3, he stressed. It was a part of
Germany's 'stability culture'. Experience showed the link between the
measure and future inflation to be intact, while yesterday's review of
alternatives had shown them to be 'second-best solutions', he said.
A review of possible modifications to presentation and interpretation would
continue until December when the 1995 M3 growth target was due to be fixed.
Meanwhile, trends in public spending policy, wage agreements and near-term
inflation were important factors guiding policy, he suggested.
'As long as other sources make us confident that future price developments
are moving in the right direction, deviations from the M3 target path can to
some extent be tolerated,' he said.
The consumer price index, currently rising at 3 per cent, was on the right
track, and there were signs of further flattening, he said. Recent increases
in raw materials prices were being countered by the relative strength of the
D-Mark against the US dollar, he added. Although a statement from the bank
warned that lingering excess liquidity in the M3 figure would cause concern,
Mr Tietmeyer claimed the measure had been growing at an 'adjusted' annual
rate of around 6 per cent for the last three months.
This is close to the bank's target range of 4-6 per cent, which has been
exceeded so far this year. The unadjusted M3 growth rate for June, released
earlier this week, was 11.3 per cent.
The bank's decision yesterday to fix the interest rate for securities
repurchase agreements at 4.85 per cent for the four weeks of the summer
break was not a signal to other countries, Mr Tietmeyer said.
Mr Johann Wilhelm Gaddum, vice-president, said the fixed 'repo' rate was in
line with market rates and expectations.
See Lex Currencies, Page 27
World stocks, Page 33
