
The launch last week by Barclays de Zoete Wedd of a commodities fund has
thrown the spotlight on an asset class in which investors are showing
increasing interest.
The fund will purchase a range of financial instruments whose returns are
linked to the value of underlying commodities, offering investors a new
route into a market traditionally difficult to access.
Its aim is to outperform a benchmark of commodity prices - the Goldman Sachs
Commodity Index - including energy, agricultural and livestock products, and
industrial materials and precious metals, weighted according to world
production.
Although it is the first to be listed in London, it is one of a number of
recent initiatives offering investors exposure to commodity-based
derivatives. Last month, for example, Japanese regulators licensed six firms
to offer investment funds specialising in futures and options on
commodities.
ED & F. Man, the UK commodity broker, which already has about Dollars 440m
under management allocated to commodities, is set to launch a commodities
fund this month.
The range of individual derivative instruments on offer to these funds, and
to investors in general, has also widened recently.
'These tools allow investors to take financial positions in commodity
markets, without the physical exposure. They can use commodities as part of
their portfolio along with more traditional investments like bonds and
equities,' said Ms Emma Conyers, an associate responsible for commodity
investor marketing at JP Morgan.
Among products being marketed are:
Commodity linked notes, which have a maturity of anything between six months
to two years or longer, offer the investor either a principle or interest
rate which is tied to the price of a commodity or basket of commodities.
Commodity-linked warrants allow investors to buy call or put options which
are listed on an exchange. Options give the holder the right to sell (a put
option) or buy (a call option) commodities in the future at a price
determined at the outset. 'A significant activity this year has been in
commodity call option warrants which allow investors to participate in
rising prices,' said Mr Martin Fraenkel, manager of commodity risk
management at Chase Manhattan bank in London.
Another instrument - which is more common in the US than in Europe - is the
limited partnership, in which the investor becomes a partner in the
commodities fund and so benefits directly from the profits the fund makes.
Investors can also buy shares and bonds issued by the funds - the value of
the share and the coupon offered on the bond vary in value with the profit
the fund makes.
With bond and equity markets plummeting, commodities have come into their
own as protection against rising inflation, as a play on economic growth,
and, increasingly, as an alternative asset class in their own right.
Investors have become increasingly interested in assets that have, on some
basket measures, risen in price by around 23 per cent this year alone. They
are also attracted by the fact that prices of commodities, such as oil and
gas, zinc and copper, are inversely related to bonds and equities -
commodity prices rise while bond and equity prices fall.
'Over the last 10 years, commodities have been a very dull asset,' said Mr
Graeme Stephens, corporate finance manager at ED & F. Man in Switzerland.
'But now there is a resurgence in commodity prices, driven by economic
growth in both the developed and developing world, and a resurgence of
interest in commodities themselves.'
But what happens when the world's economic cycle moves on and commodity
prices begin to fall again?
Many prices have already risen to such an extent that that some people are
questioning how much further they have to rise. Will commodity derivatives
and commodities funds then go out of fashion?
'It works both ways,' said Mr Stephens. 'What we want to see is price
movement up or down. We can exploit movement in either direction using
derivatives.'
'This commodities bull market is a little bit different from others,' said
Mr Fraenkel. 'This time the increased sophistication of derivative
instruments has reduced the barriers to entry, and this greater ease of
access means investors will maintain their exposure to commodities to keep
the diversity of their portfolios.'
