
North Korea early today released a US airman whose helicopter went down over
the communist state nearly two weeks ago.
His release appeared to defuse the fresh diplomatic row that flared up
between Pyongyang and Washington only two months after they had finalised an
accord on the North's nuclear programme.
The pilot, Chief Warrant Officer Bobby Hall, crossed the border at Panmunjom
into South Korea. His release came after the US sent a senior envoy, Mr
Thomas Hubbard, to Pyongyang on Wednesday for negotiations.
A Washington official said the US had expressed 'sincere regret' for the
helicopter's violation of North Korean air space. It agreed to hold contacts
with the North in an 'appropriate forum' to prevent similar incidents in the
future.
The US believes the existing Military Armistice Commission, set up after the
Korean War, should be the forum for such contacts. But North Korea could
well press for separate bilateral talks.
The North Koreans have insisted that the two US pilots - one of whom was
killed when their helicopter came down - were on a spying mission and they
published a 'confession' from Mr Hall.
In his ambiguous confession, Mr Hall admitted that his reconnaissance
helicopter made an 'intrusion deep' into North Korean airspace, adding 'this
criminal action is inexcusable and unpardonable'.
But any further delay in his release might have increased chances of the new
Republican-controlled US Congress trying to block implementation of the US
nuclear accord with North Korea. Under this accord, Pyongyang agreed to
dismantle its nuclear programme in return for US diplomatic ties and
international economic aid.
The pilot's apology may have provided a face-saving means for his release
while allowing North Korea to exploit the incident for propaganda purposes
and justify its downing of the helicopter.
The statement, if it was dictated by North Korean officials as many believe,
did not offer much support for Pyongyang's allegation that the helicopter
was on a spying mission and that its intrusion was deliberate.
Mr Hall's statement said his helicopter 'deviated' from its planned flight
route within South Korea, but gave no explanation why it strayed across the
demilitarised zone into the North. This could imply support for the US claim
that the helicopter lost its way due to a navigational error.
But some South Korean government analysts believe Mr Hall's statement that
it was on an 'observation reconnaissance' mission could be interpreted as
espionage if North Korea decides to press the affair.
North Korea may possibly exploit the incident to support its demand that the
US sign a formal treaty ending the 1950-53 Korean war and begin withdrawing
its 37,000 troops from South Korea.
