
Internet has grown into a global metropolis but, like many large cities,
this electronic community linked by computer networks is now struggling to
deal with rising crime.
Last month, Internet officials reported that tens of thousands of secret
passwords had been stolen. The thieves obtained keys to the private computer
files and messages of their victims.
The incidents demonstrate the vulnerability of Internet and raise questions
about its use as an information thoroughfare by businesses and others who
may be sending or receiving sensitive information via electronic mail or
file transfers.
Despite its genesis in a US Department of Defence programme in the early
1970s, Internet was never intended to be a secure network - quite the
opposite. It began as an electronic communications system for researchers in
US universities and government laboratories, with the idea of encouraging
dialogue and sharing ideas.
Early Internet users seldom thought of protecting computer files from
intruders. 'Security was not a very high priority on Internet. Openness and
communications were the most important issues,' says William Yundt, director
of networking at Stanford University, California. 'As the Internet
population grows, however, that is inevitably changing.'
Over the past few years, use of Internet has grown exponentially as
individuals, businesses and colleges throughout the world have linked up
their computers and local networks to 'The Net', as it is commonly called.
There are now an estimated 20m Internet users and commercial data traffic is
increasing at a compound rate of 20 per cent a month, says Al Hoover,
vice-president of ANS, a data communications company which operates the
high-speed US coast-to-coast 'backbone' of Internet for the National Science
Foundation.
The expanding population of Internet has brought with it some undesirable
elements. These include 'crackers' who make a hobby of breaking into private
computer files. To date, most such incidents appear to have been pranks by
individuals out to prove their computer prowess.
The latest incidents are, however, unprecedented in scale and may be the
work of an organised group, Internet experts fear. A 'sniffer' program
masquerading as an innocent computer program was planted in several
computers on Internet, says Terry McGillen of the Computer Emergency
Response Team (CERT) Coordination Centre at Carnegie-Mellon University in
Pennsylvania. This secretly recorded the passwords and names of individuals
who accessed the affected computers. Armed with these passwords, the
'crackers' can examine private computer files and record, change or destroy
data or send computer messages in the name of the password holder.
Last October, a cracker obtained passwords that may have been used to access
dozens of computers in US, Japanese and European companies as well as
universities and government departments. In another case, a month earlier,
the electronic mail and files of a California magazine were invaded by a
cracker. Computers at the University of California have been 'cracked', as
has the host computer of 'The Well', a California group providing public
access to Internet.
Victims of the latest incidents include users at computer sites in the US
and Europe, McGillen says. 'And the preliminary estimate that tens of
thousands of passwords may have been compromised could significantly
increase. We have been flooded with calls and are still gathering data.'
CERT has warned all Internet users to change their passwords as a
precaution. However, this is only a temporary solution because new passwords
could be stolen in the same way.
The crux of the problem is that passwords currently flow through most
computers on Internet in 'clear type', making it all too easy for crackers
to record them illicitly. Password encryption is the obvious solution, but
implementing such a change will take time and is fraught with problems.
First, there needs to be an encryption standard for all computers linked to
Internet. Then it would have to be adopted by all computer sites.
Development of an encryption standard is under way. However, as Yundt points
out, security measures are a nuisance for legitimate network users and can
be expensive to implement. They also run contrary to the free spirit of open
communication that is at the heart of Internet culture.
Another potential hurdle is that, despite protests from the computer
industry, the Clinton administration this month determined that export
controls should remain on most types of encryption technology. These
controls have already forced the elimination of encryption features from the
latest version of the Unix operating system used on most Internet host
computers.
In the meantime, large corporate users of Internet are erecting barriers
between their internal computer networks and Internet. 'Prudent
organisations no longer keep sensitive information on any computer that is
linked to the Internet,' says Bruce Baker, head of the information security
program at SRI International, a research and consulting group.
For Nick Trio, Internet administrator for International Business Machines'
Watson Research Centre, the challenge is to provide IBM researchers with the
benefits of access to Internet, while protecting IBM's internal computer
networks.
To achieve this, IBM and many other commercial Internet users create
'firewalls' between Internet and their internal computer networks. 'We use
secure gateways - minicomputers that are one-way links to the Internet,'
Trio explains. All electronic mail sent to IBM via Internet, for example, is
collected in a 'mail gateway' isolated from the company's internal networks.
User authentification, a technique widely used to secure corporate networks,
is also used by IBM to ensure that unwanted visitors do not access its
computers via Internet. IBM researchers wanting to access their computer
files while working at home or travelling must identify themselves with a
password and also use a 'smartcard' security device that generates the
answer to a 'random challenge' which changes every time the system is used.
Fencing off computers from the Internet is, however, analogous to installing
burglar alarms on houses without having a police force to deter criminal
activity throughout a city. Ultimately, there will have to be some form of
policing of the network to ensure data security if the 'Internet metropolis'
is to remain habitable.
