
Even in world markets every dog has its day. While bonds and equities have
plunged, real assets have staged a striking come back. Yesterday base metals
such as copper and aluminium hit new highs for the year. Others that have
soared in recent weeks and months include coffee, rubber and wool. Oil has
managed a modest uplift. Does this presage a renewed bout of inflation?
It seems unlikely, even though surging commodity prices have often
foreshadowed inflationary problems in the past. There is nothing in the
macro-economic environment to match the explosive growth of foreign exchange
reserves or the oil shocks of the 1970s. Nor is synchronised economic growth
creating excessive pressure on commodity supplies as it did two decades ago.
Since the 1970s the structure of global industry has become less sensitive
to commodity price rises. The use of oil per unit of GDP is reckoned to have
fallen by some 40 per cent and the newer information industries rely on
cheap, light inputs such as silicon more than expensive, heavy metals like
copper. Raw materials account for a low proportion of total costs. There
are, admittedly, new cartel agreements in soft commodities such as coffee.
Yet demand for such products is price-sensitive - hardly a good omen for a
cartel.
In reality, commodity prices are rising from an exceptionally depressed
base. So much the better, since it will prevent producers from closing down
capacity, thereby restricting supply and creating potential bottlenecks. The
surge is a predictable response to the strength of the US recovery. It also
reflects demand from the fast growing Asian economies, including China. And
the hedge funds, gored by the bear market in bonds, have switched their
febrile attention to commod-ities.
Yet gold, which Fed chairman Mr Alan Greenspan admits to watching, has
obdurately failed to levitate, partly because a non-income yielding
investment is expensive to hold when real interest rates are high. This
points to volatility in the course of a cyclical upturn rather than a
sustained, financially-driven bubble. And with competition in retailing in
the developed world still fierce, the recent rise will be felt more in
profit margins than consumer prices. No reason yet to panic over beans,
bellies and barley.
