
On washing days, when I was young, a favourite game was to burrow inside the
sheets blowing on the line, close my eyes and spirit myself to some faraway
land of exotic foreign playmates.
Nowadays neither imagination nor wind-billowing sheets are necessary.
Instead, late at night when real-world friends are sleeping, I make a coffee
and sit at my desktop computer in Boston, US, to begin travels in the
virtual world which may take me anywhere from an aid organisation in Bombay
to a research station atop a volcano in Hawaii.
Across the globe, millions are engaged in heated on-line discussion of
everything from politics to Elvis sightings, swopping travel or business
tips, or even conducting love affairs with people they have never met. We
are users of Internet, the worldwide web of computer networks and electronic
message (E-mail) systems. Its proliferation looks set to be as important to
the 1990s as the spread of personal computers was to the 1980s and has
enormous social and political implications.
Since access opened to the public two years ago, an estimated 20m people
from 60 countries have subscribed to this peculiar world with its own
language, culture and rules of behaviour or 'netiquette'. According to
figures released in December, at the Internet World '93 conference, 150,000
or more log on each month. In the US no business card is complete without an
E-mail address.
In general users are not computer nerds or social misfits who prefer
communicating with a screen rather than a person. They are ordinary people
seeking electronic soul mates to meet on-line without barriers of racism,
sexism or age, without facing crime on the streets, and with whom they can
form a community to compensate for the fragmentation of family and society.
In The Virtual Community, Howard Rheingold writes of the phenomenon:
'Perhaps cyberspace is one of the informal public places where people can
rebuild aspects of the community lost when the small shop became an
out-of-town mall.'
While taking part in the world's largest ongoing conversation may make
people feel good and enable them to learn about other cultures and garner
information, the implications are far larger. A system that gives direct
access to an educated population equivalent to more than twice that of
Portugal and multiplying, clearly has tremendous political and commercial
potential.
Internet advocates believe its spread will boost grassroots participation in
public policy. Rheingold describes it as an electronic Agora, the
marketplace in Athenian democracy where citizens met to debate. President
Bill Clinton, the first head of state to go on-line, says increasing
electronic access between the public and the administration will revitalise
citizen-based democracy.
All White House press releases and proposals are fed into the system and the
administration aims to provide computers in libraries, town halls and
shopping malls from which people can vent their views. Vice-president Al
Gore has even held an Internet press conference.
Sitting at the keyboard and messaging the US President gives a sense of
empowerment which some find overwhelming. At the Computer Museum in Boston,
where an exhibit allows visitors to send E-mail to Bill, I watched one
voluble character rendered wordless at the keyboard, typing only 'Dear Mr
President, How are You? Geoffrey'. Of course, Clinton is not sitting at his
screen personally replying to the 1,000 E-mail messages he receives each day
but White House officials insist that everyone gets a reply 'after
appropriate consideration'.
Democrats are not the only ones to spot Internet's potential. The Republican
Party executive went on-line last month with an electronic newsletter and
instant rebuttals and counterproposals to Clinton speeches. Marty Connors,
director of the Exchange Foundation, a Republican think tank, has elaborated
a plan called Govern-Net to improve governance by enabling mayors in
different cities to swap ideas and giving people direct access to party
bosses.
He envisages Internet becoming an essential part of election strategy. 'I
see it as perhaps the political tool of the future - at least as important
as mailshots and 'phone campaigning. The idea of reaching households
directly with my message unfiltered is very attractive.' A council officer
in Sunnyvale California was elected after campaigning almost entirely on
Internet.
Others are less convinced of the benefits. Samuel Huntington, director of
the Olin Institute, at Harvard University, warns: 'We are in danger of
creating a two-class society - those who are part of the information
technology revolution and those who are not. Can you train a whole society
to be computer literate?'
For those with access to a computer and modem getting on to Internet is
fairly cheap - less than Dollars 20 (Pounds 13) a month for an hour a day in
Europe and North America. But it is about as user-friendly as the roads in
Birmingham's Spaghetti Junction and first steps in cyberspace can be
daunting. In his book The Whole Internet, Ed Kroll compares it to 'grabbing
a handful of Jello - the firmer your grasp the more oozes down your arm'.
Internet has three main uses. The first is E-mail - electronic messages that
are far cheaper than long-distance telephone calls and faster than the post
(or snail-mail as Net users call it). Second, it functions as a public
bulletin board on which one can read and post messages in 2,500 discussion
groups on everything from out-of-body experiences to the best way to clean
an aquarium. There are groups of subjects under eight main headings such as
'alt' for alternative, 'biz' for business, 'comp' for computer-related
matters and 'rec' for recreational activities. It is like being able to
wander into a series of pubs in which conversations are underway - except
this one never closes. Finally, Internet can be used to retrieve information
from distant locations. That day's Supreme Court rulings, the Encyclopaedia
Britannica and the complete works of Shakespeare are all on-line; satellite
weather maps or entire books can be downloaded in minutes.
The only way to start is to dig in. A cybervirgin, I had been impressed by a
cocktail encounter with a graduate student of economics at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. He told me that he had posted questions from a
tough take-home exam on the Net and soon had economists the world over
working on the solutions, earning him top marks. So when my mother told me
she would like a CD for Christmas of Bach's Concerto for 2 Violins, I hit
the 'm' button late one night to mail a message into 'rec. music.
classical', asking for suggestions of the best recording. When I signed on
the next morning I had 40 suggestions - unfortunately all different.
Inspired by this success, I trailed through and found I could get all the
latest news from Latin America - where I lived until recently - follow
scandals in the beleaguered Conservative government back home in the UK or
read about the hottest jazz clubs in New York. For a while I was a passive
wanderer, enjoying other people's exchanges such as those in 'alt. fan.
british accent' where British users tried to explain to a man from Illinois
how his ancestors from Bedford would have pronounced words such as 'mirror'.
Another favourite is 'alt. good. morning' which tries to brighten the day.
Wednesday's mailings included a poem, a warning from a Finnish user not to
walk on the ice to catch fish, some lyrics from rock band The Cure and a
riddle about the number of people with more than two arms.
Growing more cyberhappy, I began posting, particularly after discovering the
intriguing 'alt. history. what if' group which discusses issues such as what
would have happened if the south had won the Civil War in the US. To
compensate for the absence of body language various conventions have
developed. Laughter is represented by :-) while :-( means the author got out
of bed the wrong side. Writing in capitals is the Net equivalent of
shouting.
Soon I was experiencing my first electronic pick-up line from an 'aspiring
actor in California wishing to discuss Arthurian legends'. It began: 'I am
6ft with curly golden hair and drive a red Corvette.' The Internet is full
of people hoping to discover E-mail love.
David Weinstein, a 32-year-old software designer from Boston, was using the
Net to keep up with developments in his business when he came across 'alt.
personals' - the electronic equivalent of pasting loveletters on a public
notice board.
He says: 'I was lonely and having difficulty meeting Jewish girls so I
placed some ads. It seemed very public so I made them anonymous. That didn't
work so I sent some stories about dating.'
His stories attracted the attention of Michele Schneiderman, a 29-year-old
teacher from Columbus, Ohio and, four months later, they were sharing a
cabin on a Caribbean cruise.
Not all E-mail love stories have happy endings. A notorious Frenchman posed
as a woman on-screen, carrying on a series of Net-romances before being
exposed.
For many their desktop screen has become a shoulder to cry on. Forums have
evolved for Aids and cancer sufferers, for those undergoing divorce and
victims of rape or abuse. One user told me: 'Internet saved my marriage by
being able to talk to others in the same situation'.
Another said: 'Internet is a drug. You can pour your heart out to people
you'll never meet . . . it's like a practice zone for real-life.'
The Net has tremendous practical uses. Teachers in remote areas can compare
lesson plans and academics can swap research findings. Diane Williams, of
the Technology In Education project at Harvard Graduate School, says:
'Through Internet I have been able to discuss ideas with colleagues in
Milan, Tasmania and London and get existing models which I can then adapt.'
She believes Internet will soon offer virtual classrooms for rural or
homebound students. Businessmen find it invaluable for comparing conditions
in China, exploring investment partners, swapping tips on office management
and even marketing products.
Describing Internet as the 'world's largest adhocracy', Oliver Strimpel,
executive director of the Computer Museum, says: 'We are seeing a
fundamental change in the nature and control of information.' Ironically,
for something so anarchic, its origins lie in military thinking. It was
developed as a communications network for the Pentagon able to withstand
nuclear attack. It has no central command and messages are chopped into
small packets of data, routed by the network then reassembled at their
destination.
If any part of the system is wiped out the message simply takes another
route. During the attempted putsch against Gorbachev in 1991 its Russian
counterpart Glasnet kept feeding information to the west and proved
impossible for the coup's perpetrators to block.
While this lack of any central hierarchy - there is no 'Internet Inc' - is
in some sense its glory, it also means there is no one to take
responsibility for abuses or the proliferation of pornography. This month a
Boston man was charged with abducting a young boy he is alleged to have
lured through Internet.
There is another concern. Cables which bring information into the home can
also take it out. Marc Rotenberg, of Washington-based Computer Professionals
for Social Responsibility, says: 'While Internet is a great opportunity we
are worried about the potential loss of privacy and the Orwellian spectre
that government could monitor all communication.' His organisation is
fighting US government proposals which would enable federal agencies to
wiretap the information infrastructure without needing court orders.
As the precursor of the interactive world of the much-heralded Information
Superhighway, it is not clear what the final shape of Internet will be. As
federal funding is phased out it will probably be privatised. But, with the
price of hardware tumbling and governments expected to force cable companies
to provide cheap access, the most lucrative profits are likely to accrue to
those feeding in material. A plethora of on-line services are springing up
involving publishers such as Rupert Murdoch, stores such as Sears Roebuck,
which see great potential for advertising their products, and
telecommunication giants and computer companies such as IBM and Apple. Many
newspapers are going on-line too - the San Jose Mercury, USA Today and the
Washington Post.
One warning before you go electronic globetrotting - it is highly addictive.
An advisable first reading is an E M Forster story The Machine Stops, which
paints a chilling picture of a world without human interaction, all
communications taking place through screens . . .
ACCESS TO INTERNET
Access to Internet through on-line services is becoming increasingly
competitive in north America and Europe. Prices vary depending on the amount
of usage and services offered. Some charge per hour on-line - others give
unlimited time. For an individual wanting basic services for about 20 hours
per month, expect to pay about Pounds 15 per month. Software is provided
free but signing on does require a modem which costs about Pounds 100.
Compuserve, one of the largest services, offers a one-month free trial.
Comments to: lamb@husc8. harvard. edu
