
The US and North Korea announced a breakthrough early today in talks aimed
at bringing to an end their dispute over Pyongyang's controversial nuclear
programme.
In a joint statement the two sides released an outline agreement that
includes a transfer of western nuclear technology to Pyongyang in return for
North Korea freezing its homegrown nuclear programme, which is thought to
include weapons development.
The US said it was ready to provide Pyongyang with light water reactors up
to 2,000 MW 'as soon as possible'. North Korea agreed to halt construction
of two graphite reactors near completion and to 'forego reprocessing' of
spent uranium fuel rods which the West fears pose a radiation risk. The
graphite nuclear reactors produce high-quality plutonium that can be used in
nuclear weapons.
The two sides said they were ready to establish diplomatic representation in
each other's capitals 'as a move toward full normalisation of political and
economic relations'.
North Korea also reiterated its readiness to remain a party to the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) and to allow implementation of its safeguards
agreement.
However, several important issues remain to be resolved and US officials
were cautious in assessing the impact of the accord. The deal would not
remove all nuclear bomb-making capacity from North Korea. Pyongyang does not
appear to have agreed to demands for full inspection of its nuclear
facilities.
'By no means it's a final agreement. But I think it will underscore some of
the sort of areas where there's agreement,' said Ms Dee Dee Myers, White
House press secretary.
Washington had been trying to win agreement from North Korea for 8,000 spent
uranium fuel rods, extracted from a nuclear reactor at Yongbyon in May, to
be shipped abroad for reprocessing, perhaps in China or Russia. But the two
sides agreed that the nuclear fuel rods would remain in a cooling pond and
not be reprocessed for the time being. The US fears the rods pose a
radiation risk.
US officials believe the rods contain enough plutonium to produce up to five
nuclear bombs. The CIA thinks North Korea may have already produced two
nuclear devices.
The deal would involve North Korea shutting down its graphite nuclear
reactors which produce high quality plutonium. In return, the US would
supply technology for a water-cooled reactor of the type used in the west.
These produce poorer quality plutonium, which is harder to detonate and are
easier to monitor by international observers.
It is not clear who will bear the Dollars 2bn (Pounds 1.2bn) cost of a large
water-cooled reactor. North Korea also wants compensation for ending
construction of a new large graphite reactor.
Plutonium that North Korea has already produced is not covered by the
agreement.
Nuclear conundrum, Page 3
