
The building of tension on the Korean peninsula and the possibility that
North Korea is developing nuclear weapons have stirred deep private concerns
in Japan that are masked by a public calm.
Reports of a North Korean warning that if the country had a nuclear weapon,
it would be aimed at Japan rather than at South Korea or the US, have
produced either silence or cryptic responses from Japanese government
officials and the media.
Reasons for the uneasy silence are the sensitivities towards a large Korean
community in Japan and a reliance on the protective shield of US forces that
makes it difficult for many Japanese to discuss openly the possibility of a
military crisis on their doorstep.
'It is a very sensitive issue,' Ms Mayumi Moriyama, member of Japan's upper
house and a former chief cabinet secretary, said earlier this week. 'As we
are much closer and have a very close relationship with them, it's very
difficult to discuss it openly.'
Bureaucrats and politicians alike have been reticent on the subject. The
report that North Korea's ambassador to India had stated his country's
weapons would be aimed at Japan produced the response that the foreign
ministry was trying to confirm the comments.
'We are taking the matter very seriously but we do not want unwittingly to
arouse the emotional temperature by making comments,' one official said - a
standard line by foreign ministry officials. Officials are avoiding comments
that could be interpreted by North Korea as Japanese aggression or that
could upset Korean residents in Japan.
North Korean officials claim that they suspect Japan's nuclear motives, but
Pyongyang has refused to allow full inspections of its nuclear sites,
prompting international concern that it is developing nuclear weapons.
The lack of official Japanese comment has meant that fears of developments
on the Korean peninsula and to what extent the country is prepared for the
worst have been fed largely on speculation, educated or otherwise.
Japanese newspapers have reported this week that an unnamed government
official had commented cryptically on the need to review Japan's defence
programme in the light of the North Korean situation.
