
Kermit's early popularity stemmed from being reasonably standard at a time
of great flux - and, more importantly, being free. Programmers liked the
fact that the source code was published, which saved the effort of writing
their own version.
Kermit may be old but it remains in widespread use. It is often the lowest
common denominator between two machines that are trying to communicate. It
has been enhanced to allow connections over the Internet as well as dial-up
connections which were always its forte.
Kermit lacks some of the features (such as a graphical interface) found in
newer software. Modern programs also manage far more of the low-level
interaction with the other computer. Kermit merely acts like a terminal on
the remote system and requires the user to know how to log in and access the
various services. Newer software provides a friendly front-end for the user
and hides most of the complexities.
For many people, Kermit was a doorway into the world of communications,
allowing them to connect to different systems all over the world. This has
become much wider and has formalised into the Internet, and it has become
impossible for all but network gurus to navigate their way around. As a
result, there are numerous books on the Internet and ways to get around it.
Take the simple problem of trying to find the latest copy of the Kermit
software. There are thousands of computers connected to the Internet.
Many of them will have Kermit somewhere on them but it would require you to
log on to each in turn and then search through all the files looking for it.
To minimise the pain of searching, a database has been developed (known as
Archie) that keeps a list of all the programs that other local systems hold.
Using Archie you could ask which machines had a copy of Kermit and where to
look for it. There are many systems running Archie all around the world to
avoid a single system becoming overloaded. They regularly exchange
information with one another to keep up to date.
Once you have found the location of the software using Archie, you would
then call the system that holds Kermit and request it. The Internet is very
open and there are a very large number of systems which allow anyone to log
on using a name like 'anonymous' or 'guest.'
It is a continual surprise to Internet newcomers how much software is
available for free. Often it comes with the source code allowing you make
changes to it yourself, if required.
Archie has limitations - it still only keeps an index of the program by
name. If the Kermit software we were looking for were in a file called
'K290994' then we would not find it. Most systems use meaningful names, but
it is not guaranteed.
The Internet is not just one large bulletin board containing programs, it
also is a repository of vast libraries of information. From your desk, you
can access databases as diverse as the Columbia Law Library, the CIA
Factbook, and the Acoustic Guitar Digest. To make these accessible online,
the 'WAIS' program was developed.
WORD SEARCHES
When documents are stored in a WAIS database, it builds an index of every
word used in the document. To perform a search, you simply ask your WAIS
software to find all documents that contain the particular combinations of
words you supply.
To make it manageable, you usually specify particular libraries to search. A
list of libraries is available from a central WAIS database and the software
is supplied with the ability to get this information on start-up.
Most WAIS databases are maintained through volunteer effort and access is
free. Some commercial information providers (such as Dow Jones) also
maintain WAIS format databases but, naturally enough, charge a fee for
access to them.
The newest service on the Internet is the World Wide Web (WWW) which
provides a hypertext database. A hypertext database is one where selected
words in the text can be expanded at any time to provide a fuller
definition. World Wide Web also allows links between items so that this
article about Kermit might contain a link to an article about the Internet
itself.
If you wanted to know more, you would follow that thread while still keeping
a bookmark where you were.
One real advantage of WWW is that there are versions with a graphical user
interface which makes searching much more convenient and intuitive for the
non-guru. It also provides a far more uniform interface to systems that may
be completely different underneath.
The pool that Kermit was spawned in has now become an ocean. Nonetheless, it
still forms an important jumping-off point for new users.
