
One of the biggest railway mergers in US corporate history, Burlington
Northern's agreed Dollars 2.5bn takeover of Santa Fe Pacific, was yesterday
in disarray following the surprise intervention of another big US railway
company, Union Pacific, with a hostile bid worth Dollars 3.2bn.
At the end of June, Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Pacific, two of the
four big railway networks on the western side of the US, said they planned
to form the biggest railway network in the US through a friendly takeover of
Santa Fe by Burlington.
Santa Fe's shareholders were due to vote on the all-share offer next month.
But late on Wednesday night, Union Pacific, another of the four biggest
railway companies west of the Mississippi, unexpectedly launched a higher
all-share offer for Santa Fe.
Santa Fe's board last night rejected Union Pacific's unsolicited approach,
while Burlington reaffirmed its intention to press ahead with its offer,
angrily attacking the Union Pacific bid as anti-competitive.
'Our merger with Santa Fe was a direct response to the dominant position
that Union Pacific has in the west,' Burlington said. 'This is nothing more
than an attempt to stifle healthy competition in the western US.'
The immediate question posed by the Union Pacific bid is whether it is a
serious offer or simply a disruptive tactic aimed at scuppering a friendly
merger between two of its biggest rivals.
The price offered by Union Pacific will tempt Santa Fe's shareholders. But
they will have to consider the strong possibility that a merger between
Union Pacific and Santa Fe would be disallowed on anti-trust grounds.
A precedent was set 10 years ago when Santa Fe took over Southern Pacific,
the other big railway company west of the Mississippi. Long after the deal
had been completed, the Interstate Commerce Commission, the federal
authority that regulates the railway industry, ruled that the merger was
uncompetitive and ordered it to be unbundled.
Burlington and Santa Fe have argued, with some justification, that their
merger will not eliminate competition because there are relatively few
instances where their routes coincide. They describe the deal as an
end-to-end merger of two complimentary networks.
Union Pacific may find itself on less firm ground, because its prime routes
are in direct competition with those of Santa Fe. Implicitly acknowledging
the likely criticisms, Union Pacific said it was ready to guarantee open
access on the merged company's tracks to other railway companies.
The Union Pacific bid will be highly disruptive to the Burlington-Santa Fe
deal. At one extreme, it could wreck it by causing Santa Fe's shareholders
to demand a higher price for their railway than Burlington is prepared to
pay. At the very least, it will complicate the Interstate Commerce
Commission's investigation - a process that can take up to 30 months.
Union Pacific, however, insisted its offer was serious. It said the merger
it was proposing would be better for Santa Fe's shareholders and bring more
customer benefits than a merger with Burlington.
Whatever the outcome of the bid battle, the fact that two railway companies
are fighting to acquire a third will emphasise how much the fortunes of the
US railway industry have changed in the last few years.
US freight railways, once almost bankrupt, are enjoying a surge in
profitability because of cost-cutting and increases in productivity
following deregulation in 1980. Suddenly, it seems, railways are hot
properties again.
Lex, Page 20
