
Japanese office workers are no longer alone in facing 'risutora' or
restructuring. The country's professional baseball teams are also facing a
corporate-style overhaul.
Although baseball teams had been aware of waning public support over the
past few years, not much had been done. But the spectacular arrival of
J-League, the country's professional soccer league, has attracted many
younger fans, and forced the baseball establishment to act.
Some teams have become more fan-friendly. The Hiroshima Carp have started a
'ladies' night', while the Orix Bluewave are giving out melons to fans.
Baseball officials have become so worried that they recently asked Dentsu,
the leading advertising and marketing agency, for help.
The main predicament for Japanese baseball is the younger generation, which
has a faltering enthusiasm for traditional values, as embodied by this
sport. Young Japanese are more individualistic, shun baseball's emphasis on
group effort, and are bored by the players' reluctance to show emotion on
the pitch.
Instead, they are drawn to the aggressive play of the fashion-conscious
soccer stars. The un-Japanese physical reaction - the hugging, kissing and
the baring of chests - shown by players after scoring goals has also
inspired supporters.
The trend is filtering down to school children. Little league baseball is
facing a decline in players, while the soccer club memberships are rising,
thanks to the increase in children who aspire to be like Kazu, a
Brazilian-trained goal-getter who dances the samba after scoring a goal.
This fall in support is posing a commercial threat for the baseball teams.
Last month, tickets for the season's opening game of the Giants, the most
popular baseball team, went unsold, while J-League tickets have been almost
impossible to buy.
Soccer players are grabbing most of the advertisement contracts,
traditionally won by baseball players. The video game generation is also put
off by the long baseball matches, which can stretch to over three hours.
'Even a rock concert lasts less than two hours,' complains Mr Keiya Sasaki,
director of Dentsu's sports business division. He blames the long and dull
matches on the baseball team managers' paternalistic control of the game.
Throughout every baseball match, coaches and managers on the bench twitch
their heads and wave their hands, signalling and instructing every move a
player on the field makes.
Mr Sasaki says the rigid control of teams and even over the players'
lifestyles is stifling their abilities and flair.
To liven up baseball, his company has advised the baseball association to
encourage a younger batch of players, to try to produce more stars and
increase freedom for the players inside and outside the baseball stadium.
