
The British Chambers of Commerce has been trying, its outgoing president Mr
Christopher Stewart-Smith said: 'To set out the business agenda.'
This agenda, as it has been exposed before about 500 executives in
Birmingham, has been a question of updating techniques to deal with
long-established business truths.
Thus Ms Jean Muir, the fashion designer, stressed one of the factors -
design - which has been a continual problem for generations of business.
'Those companies who consistently produce good ideas and practical
commitment to quality and craft not only last the longest, but in
economically challenging times are those that suffer least.'
But corporate survival and success depend above all on the skill and
motivation of a well-trained workforce responding to the needs of customers.
'People are the most important asset of a company,' said Mr Nick Temple,
chief executive of IBM (UK). 'The future for us is customer loyalty,' said
Mr Stephen Cronin, group resources director at Rank Xerox (UK).
Communication both within and without a company is seen as easier in small
units. Hence, as Mr Temple acknowledged, the reorganisation of IBM into
smaller units or, as Mr Robert Horton, chairman of Railtrack described, the
devolution of power on the rail network into 10 zones watched over by a
small headquarters.
But Mr Horton acknowledged that within Railtrack the ability to communicate
had some way to go. He admitted there had been a failure of communication
with signalmen who are threatening a strike.
Mr Allan Amey, managing director of LDV, formerly Leyland Daf Vans, warned
that 'the larger the organisation the more in-built corporate inertia
exists'.
But just as companies, according to the agenda which the chambers are laying
down, are seeking greater communication internally, there is also a process
of forging partnerships outside.
'What we are looking for is a quality company which has quality products and
delighted customers,' said Mr Cronin. But the needs of customers change and
for Mr Horton 'excellence is meeting constant change'.
The notion of partnership is being fostered by the government, especially in
its approach to inner-city revival. These are partnerships involving both
the public and private sector. Sir Reginald Eyre, chairman of Birmingham
Heartlands Development Corporation, said: 'If in three or more years ahead,
the successful regeneration of Birmingham Heartlands is to be attributed to
only one thing, then that attribute will be partnership.'
This is taking place at a time of rapid technological change and, said Dr
Peter Horne, managing director of Apricot Computers, the information
revolution will change the habit of companies doing most of their business
in local markets.
'With a worldwide communications and information network, which is cheap and
open to all, the definition of what is local will radically change.'
