
Talks between China and Taiwan on improving working relations inched forward
this week in Nanjing, the Yangtze river town, but at the trading and
investment level the relationship continues to progress strongly, too
strongly for some Taiwanese officials.
Pledged Taiwanese investment in the mainland exceeds Dollars 20bn (Pounds
12.5bn), making it the second largest investor after Hong Kong. More
noteworthy perhaps is the rate of investment. While investors from Hong
Kong, Singapore, and Thailand have been active since the mid-1980s,
Taiwanese businessmen really got started in 1991, the year Taipei lifted its
formal ban on business links with the mainland.
According to the mainland-published China Economic News, Taiwanese
investment amounted to Dollars 3.4bn in 1991, Dollars 5.5bn in 1992 and
Dollars 10bn last year, a total of nearly Dollars 19bn by the end of 1993.
This estimate vastly exceeds official Taiwanese investment figures (Dollars
4bn at the end of June), the Investment Commission of the Ministry of
Economic Affairs says.
One explanation for this discrepancy is that many Taiwanese have chosen not
to report their activities. Some have channelled their investment through
subsidiaries in Hong Kong and Singapore.
Taiwanese officials appear resigned to the fact that investment in the
mainland will continue to grow rapidly, but their attitudes sometimes show
two differing viewpoints. On one hand they can see real advantages in
Taiwanese business positioning itself in the world's largest market, on the
other they worry understandably about Taiwan's economy becoming captive to
China, and investment being drained away from Taiwan.
Mr Hansen Chien, spokesman for the ruling Kuomintang, reflecting gloomy
concerns of the Taiwanese establishment about becoming caught up in the
mainland's embrace, said: 'We are getting more worried about too much
investment in mainland China. We are becoming too dependent on the
mainland.'
At a political level, Mr Chien also gave voice to underlying Taiwanese
worries: 'Every time we talk with mainland China,' he said, 'it seems we are
losing more and more of our chips. We don't have too many chips to lose.
Every time we throw out a chip, we should get something back.'
Attempts by the authorities to mount what they describe as a 'go south'
policy to persuade investors to put their money in south-east Asian
economies is one among several responses aimed at tempering enthusiasm for
mainland investment.
'We are encouraging our people to go to south-east Asia, but not
discouraging them investing in the mainland, on condition we derive mutual
benefit,' says Mr Leo Tseng, deputy director-general of the Board of Foreign
Trade.
Taiwanese investment at the end of 1993 in Thailand, Malaysia, Philippines,
Indonesia and Vietnam, the main destinations for Taiwan's south-east Asian
investment, matched that of investment in the mainland; but again the
build-up of investment in China is proving much more rapid (see chart).
Typical of attitudes among larger investors to putting their money in the
mainland as opposed to south-east Asia is that expressed by representatives
of President Foods Group, the big Taiwanese food processor that has
ambitions of becoming the world's biggest food conglomerate.
The company has set up four factories in south-east Asia but targeted the
mainland because executives believe it provides better opportunities.
President Foods is establishing 12 companies involved in making a wide range
of products, including instant noodles, biscuits, animal feed and car
batteries. Since 1992, it has invested Dollars 100m, with plans to double
that figure.
But its representatives acknowledge that business in the mainland remains
extremely difficult: among problems is a lack of managerial talent and
difficulties in securing market share in a highly fragmented market where
local brand loyalties dominate. Transport bottlenecks militate against the
building of national brands.
Taiwanese officials point out that while thousands of Taiwanese businessmen
are continuing to rush to the mainland, the success rate is patchy, at best.
Mr Steven Wu, director of the Industrial Development and Investment Centre
of the Ministry of Economic Affairs, estimates that 30-50 per cent of
enterprises are making money.
'The rest have had a very sad experience,' he says. Problems encountered
include overmanning, bureaucratic obstacles and difficulties with local
partners. Mr Wu noted that the success rate of investments in south-east
Asia was higher.
But it seems that despite well publicised difficulties, Taiwanese investors
are determined to make their presence felt on the mainland, attracted as
they are by low labour costs, a huge market, and in some cases propelled by
a desire to escape from an increasingly active environmental lobby in
Taiwan.
Mr S Lee, vice-minister in the Ministry of Economic Affairs, responsible for
overseeing approvals for mainland investments, believes investment growth
will slow, but notes Taiwanese businessmen are beginning to make larger
commitments.
Mr Lee said that of the 'whole list' of 9,000 items covered by investment
guidelines, Taiwanese business was permitted to make about 4,588 on the
mainland, another 4,000 items were in a 'grey area', meaning approval would
be withheld for the time being, and about 1,000 'high-tech' items were
forbidden.
Industries in the 'grey area' include cement factories and petrochemical
plants involved in producing synthetic fibres, in which Taiwan leads the
world. The authorities are reluctant to allow competing industries to move
across the Taiwan Straits.
Mr Lee says: 'We are reviewing our policy (on investment approvals)
cautiously and progressively'. The problem for the Taiwanese authorities,
however, is that pressure from Taiwanese business is such that it is having
great difficulty holding the line.
