
White is the universal symbol of purity, hope, new beginnings and, in some
cultures, denotes the spirituality of mourning. In spite of its innocent
appeal, white is wickedly difficult to wear, much harder, for example, than
black. Just a touch of it adds charm or drama - the collar of a white shirt,
for example, or Chanel's white camellia on a black velvet bow.
One of this summer's main colours is white, the most pure and extreme result
of fashion's swing from over-ornate power dressing and heavy black layers.
Shops are already awash with white clothes so we are going to have to make
the best of it.
Let us start with the bad points. White is a killer for any but the most
positive or tanned complexions, draining the face of life. This is fine for
wan catwalk waifs: not so good if you want to look normal.
White summer fabrics inevitably look flimsy, even unintentionally
transparent. The corollary of this is that, unless carefully styled, white
can look cheap - and white high-heeled shoes cheaper than anything, in spite
of Karl Lagerfeld's efforts to promote them. And, most important of all,
white is impractical because it is always in the laundry.
But white has good points which make it irresistible for summer, especially
in the airily-layered forms of fashion. The spirit which inspired pale
colonial linens and still, to some extent, governs sports clothes, makes
white the obvious choice on mirage-shimmering, bee-humming summer days.
It seemed natural in our photographic location, the South African vineyard
of Klein Constantia at harvest-time, where it complemented the white Cape
Dutch buildings and contrasted with the lush, dark green trees and vines.
But try to think further than the now-hackneyed long, white colonial dress.
Issey Miyake said it all when he put on the catwalk a bunch of
gently-whirling dancers, showing to best advantage the lightest of crushed
silk layers in loose, simple shapes.
The trick is to create the illusion of light passing through gauzy fabric
without attracting the ghastly description 'see-through'.
You do this by building layers of extremely fine material. Two layers of
even the flimsiest chiffon are a lot more opaque than one. The top layer -
be it a linen gauze shirt or a cobwebby knit - is left loose enough to play
the trick of the light but you need to build on an unobtrusive base.
Nothing cheapens white so much as the cut line of a bra or slip. Instead,
choose a plain, flat-strapped crop-top (white or flesh-coloured, by Jockey
or Knickerbox) or a plain sports bra - Berlei does one that looks like a
crop-top with built-in cups, which has matching high-cut briefs in white or
flesh. This shows through like a singlet rather than underwear.
Alternatively, Marks and Spencer's new Body Shapers range of flat-strapped
bras and briefs has four skin tones and is well-nigh invisible, as is
Gossard's Glossies bra.
Fabric is another area in which Miyake shows the way. Avoid tailored white.
Choose fabrics that go from washing to wearing in one easy movement. This
summer's crinkled finishes, inspired by Miyake's geometrically crushed silk
and man-made Pleats Please range are ideal for packing and ease of care.
Weighty, drapy viscose also hangs out well, especially as knit.
These fabrics are also soft enough to flow around the body, counteracting
white's weight-adding properties. And to beat its complexion-deadening
ability, choose its kinder sister, ivory. Either looks good with a light tan
and minimal make-up. Paler faces need colouring carefully to add life but
not overwhelm the fragility of near-white clothes.
Dior's Couleurs du Temps range gets it right with its Desert Landscape
five-colour palette of warm, earth-toned eyeshadows or the pearly rose,
slate and honey shades of Sands and Sandstone. These are warmed with a
slightly pink-toned blusher, Rose Atlas, and a pearly natural pink (Desert
Pearls) or pale pink-beige (Gobi Moon) lipstick. Nina Ricci Les Orchidees
two-tone blusher has a slightly tanned, sunkissed tone that ties in with
their Les Sepias number 13 lipstick.
The same subtlety should be applied to accessories. New white style needs
minimal jewellery, perhaps just a smidgeon of silver, though tiny pieces in
matt gold go better with warmer ivory. Metallic shoes give a lift to
all-over white, provided they are plain, flat sandals. Otherwise, choose
cream or beige suede or fabric shoes, or tan sandals for an informal look.
White had a bad name in the 1980s for being the natural partner to a
mahogany tan, bright red lips and jangly gilt jewellery. Think of a style
that is the diametric opposite and you will find white is also right for the
1990s.
