
Mr Bill Gates, chairman of Microsoft, the world's largest computer software
company, will announce plans for a worldwide on-line information service for
personal computer users today. Microsoft is expected to undercut
competitors' prices by about half.
The company's entry into on-line services is a serious challenge to existing
services such as CompuServe, Prodigy and America Online, which at present
lead the market with a combined subscriber base of about 6m users.
The Microsoft network is expected to be activated next spring and to
incorporate a range of services - among them, shopping catalogues, financial
services, news services and reference works, including an on-line
encyclopedia.
Like existing services, Microsoft's will include electronic mail, bulletin
boards and 'chat' services that allow subscribers to engage in discussion
groups, as well as links to the Internet, the global computer network. The
Microsoft network will incorporate an easy-to-use graphical interface
designed to appeal to novice home computer users.
Instead of charging users according to the length of time they are connected
to the service, Microsoft will keep basic fees low and add 'subscription'
charges for access to selected news and information.
Microsoft has been seeking to attract publishers to become 'content
providers' for its network by promising them a larger share of revenues than
the 20 per cent to 30 per cent typically offered by existing services and
offering on-line advertising.
Access to the Microsoft network will be incorporated in Windows 95, a
forthcoming version of the popular Windows PC program. Only by purchasing
the new program will PC users be able to use the Microsoft on-line service.
Already, competitors are alleging that that represents an unfair use of
Microsoft's near-monopoly in the market for PC operating systems - about 85
per cent of all PCs sold today use Microsoft Windows - to limit competition
in the on-line services market.
Such charges come as the US Justice Department is scrutinising Microsoft's
recently announced plan to acquire Intuit, a developer of personal finance
software, for Dollars 1.5bn. The acquisition is widely seen as a step
towards providing financial services via the Microsoft Network.
Earlier Microsoft settled Justice Department antitrust charges concerning
its software licensing methods by signing a consent decree under which it
has changed the way in which it sells software to PC manufacturers. The
terms of the agreement also put Microsoft's business practices under Justice
Department scrutiny for 6 1/2 years.
If Microsoft can avoid legal barriers, it seems poised to expand the use of
on-line computer services. Fewer than 10 per cent of individual PC users now
subscribe to any on-line service, but industry analysts say Microsoft's
entry might quickly double that.
