
When asked to name the commonest cancer in men under 45, most people get it
wrong, I concluded at a recent dinner party. My question killed the
conversation dead, but it highlighted the importance of testicular cancer.
One man in 450 will develop this cancer before the age of 50 and more than
1,400 new cases are diagnosed in the UK every year. The incidence is even
higher in other northern European countries, notably Denmark, Germany,
Switzerland, Ireland and Luxembourg.
Testicular cancer is generally treated with a combination of surgery and
chemotherapy, with great success. (Sterility is the rule for a year or two
after treatment, but the long-term outlook is excellent.) Around 95 per cent
recover completely and many father children. Unfortunately, results are less
good when the disease is advanced. In 1992, this cancer killed 123 men in
England and Wales.
Few men examine themselves regularly - only 3 per cent, according to an
Imperial Cancer Research Fund (ICRF) study. As for breast disease, the value
of self-examination is disputed, but many authorities now recommend it on
the basis that it is important to be familiar with one's own anatomy.
Signs to be taken seriously include swelling of one testicle, or a lump on
the front or side. Sometimes there is real pain, but often there are only
vague symptoms such as dull ache, heaviness, or change in feel.
Unfortunately, men are reluctant to go to the doctor and may have to be
propelled into the surgery by wife or girlfriend. Many men, perhaps
believing that the symptoms will go away, leave things too late - over half
of all those with testicular cancer seek help after the tumour has spread.
This cancer does not spread to the easily felt lymph glands in the groin,
but to those around the aorta, deep within the abdomen. This is entirely
logical given that the testicle originates embryologically from that area.
In the past 20 years, the incidence of testicular cancer has doubled. It is
rising, especially in younger white men and in higher social classes, for
reasons which are unclear. Nobody knows the cause of testicular cancer, but
risk factors are coming to light.
Until recently, an undescended or partly descended testis was one of the few
known causal factors. If left surgically uncorrected beyond the age of 10 or
so, this condition roughly trebles the risk of testicular cancer - even on
the side which appears normal.
Heredity appears to be even more important and a history of this cancer in a
close relative calls for extra vigilance. Sons of men with the disease are
four times as likely to develop it, while brothers of those affected are
nearly 10 times as likely to do so.
In the hope of finding a gene for it, a research project is now being
carried out into families with two or more members with testicular cancer.
Sixty such families have been identified so far in Britain and the Cancer
Research Campaign (CRC) and ICRF are on the lookout for more.
Over the years, there have been worries about the possible effect of mumps,
vasectomy, injury and heat (especially in the form of tight trousers, hot
baths and central heating).
A leading study from the UK Testicular Cancer Study Group looked into the
medical and social histories of nearly 800 men with the disease in nine
British health regions. The findings were reported in May in the British
Medical Journal and this month in the British Journal of Cancer.
There seems to be no association between testicular cancer and either heat
or mumps (even after puberty, when orchitis, as it is known, is more
likely). But a history of any sexually transmitted disease appears to double
the risk of this cancer. There is also some relation between infertility and
testicular cancer, but it is not yet clear whether this is cause-and-effect.
Men contemplating vasectomy, however, should be reassured - there is no
evidence of a link.
The study suggests that regular exercise could have a protective effect  -
men who exercise for 15 or more hours a week had a substantially lower
incidence. But injury to the testis can double the risk. This could be
significant in some sports, although there are not yet enough data on which
to base firm advice.
Finally, there is some suggestion that an early puberty is an important risk
factor. This ties in with the theory that high levels of gonadotrophin
hormones from the pituitary gland may stimulate cells in such a way as to
promote cancerous change. And since puberty is occurring earlier these days,
often well before the standard age of 14 in boys, it is also consistent with
the rising trend in testicular cancer. However, there is unlikely to be a
single cause for this cancer or, put another way, one remains to be
discovered.
For more information about testicular cancer, contact ICRF, PO Box 123,
Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3FX. Tel 071 242 0200.
The author is a London general practitioner.
