
Microsoft, the world's largest computer software company, which is being
investigated by the anti-trust division of the US Justice Department, is
attempting to blunt new industry charges that it tried to limit the
competitive activities of other software developers.
Microsoft angered computer industry executives and drew renewed attention
from the Justice Department last week, when it became known the company had
asked at least three software companies - Borland International, Lotus
Development and WordPerfect - to sign restrictive 'non-disclosure
agreements' (NDAs) if they got pre-release copies of a new version of
Windows, Microsoft's personal computer operating system program.
Microsoft now says it 'made a mistake' in demanding that the software
companies agree not to allow some of their programmers to work on products
that compete with Microsoft's Windows program for three years as a
pre-condition to granting them early access to the new version.
Without such access, the software companies could not continue development
of applications programs, such as word processing or data base programs, for
a large portion of the personal computer market. Microsoft's Windows is
installed in virtually all PCs except those from Apple Computer.
NDAs are widely used in the computer industry to protect confidential
technology, before general commercial release. But the new Microsoft
agreements contain unusual terms, software industry lawyers said.
They require, for example, that programmers - all of whom must be
individually approved by Microsoft - obtain Microsoft's written permission
to work on programs designed for other operating systems, including the
products of Novell, Microsoft's largest competitor in the PC software
market.
Microsoft specifies that the programmers should not be allowed to
participate in the 'design and/or development, feedback, or guidance of a
company product that is competitive with (Windows)'.
Identified in the text of the agreement as one such competing technology is
OpenDoc, a standard that is being developed by Apple Computer, WordPerfect,
Novell, Borland, IBM and others to enable programs from all developers to
work together more efficiently. Microsoft is not part of this industry
group.
This restriction would preclude collaboration among the supporters of
OpenDoc, said the legal counsel of one of the software companies in the
group, thus preventing the development of a (non-Microsoft) competing
industry standard.
After receiving a complaint from WordPerfect, Microsoft agreed on Friday to
remove references to OpenDoc from the NDA. Microsoft also said that it would
drop the three-year time commitment in agreements with WordPerfect and
others.
'We want to assure our customers and the software industry that our
objective is to make Chicago (code-name for the new version of Windows) and
all our operating systems compatible and open, and we will respond
constructively to any concerns raised,' said Mr Paul Maritz, senior vice
president.
Nonetheless, Microsoft has 'provided the Justice Department with further
evidence for potential charges that Microsoft is discriminating against some
companies in the access that it provides to an essential facility,' said Ms
Wendy Goldman Rohm, author of a forthcoming book on Microsoft's antitrust
struggles.
Under US anti-trust laws, an 'essential facility' is something that the
market needs and cannot duplicate. 'Microsoft is clearly discriminating
against companies that may be in a position to create an alternative
software standard, thus ensuring that Microsoft standards will be the ones
adopted by this industry,' said Ms Rohm.
