
US army pilot Bobby Hall, in his first debriefing by US officials since
being freed by North Korea, said his helicopter was hit by air defences
after it strayed across the border, forcing him into an emergency landing.
Chief Warrant Officer Hall reported that after he brought the craft to the
ground, he pulled his gravely wounded co-pilot, Chief Warrant Officer David
Hilemon, from the aircraft, according to a US government official.
Mr Hall told officials that Mr Hilemon died a short time later, the official
said.
At the time of the shooting-down, Mr Hall thought he was over South Korea
and apparently did not realise his helicopter had been struck and that Mr
Hilemon had been hit, the official said.
Mr Hall said he was well treated in captivity, the official said.
North Korea yesterday returned Mr Hall yesterday. His release appeared to
ensure that the recent US-North Korean nuclear agreement will proceed
smoothly after Washington warned earlier that his continued detention could
jeopardise the accord.
The US is 'pleased that we can now look to the future and implement the
important project', said Mr Thomas Hubbard, deputy assistant secretary of
state, who spent two 'difficult' days in Pyongyang negotiating Mr Hall's
release.
Under the nuclear accord, the US has promised to establish diplomatic ties
with North Korea and guarantee international aid if Pyongyang abandons its
nuclear programme.
The return of Mr Hall was the result of a diplomatic compromise.
The US expressed regret for the intrusion of the helicopter into North
Korean airspace, which Washington said was an accident caused by a
navigational error.
The US did not offer a formal apology as demanded by North Korea, which
claimed the helicopter was on a spy mission.
However, North Korea appeared satisfied by a 'confession' signed by Mr Hall,
which described the 'illegal intrusion' as a 'criminal action' and asked for
forgiveness by Pyongyang.
North Korea claimed the US had agreed to further bilateral military contacts
to prevent future incidents. But Mr Hubbard denied that the US had given
such commitments.
