
South Korean officials yesterday expressed optimism that an unprecedented
summit meeting with North Korea will take place, after Pyongyang agreed to
discuss arrangements.
'The North Koreans' sincerity seems higher than at any other time in the
past,' said Mr Han Sung-joo, South Korea's foreign minister.
He described as 'encouraging' the North's quick approval of a proposal from
Seoul to hold a preparatory meeting for the summit on June 28, to be
attended by each side's deputy prime minister.
Previous attempts to arrange inter-Korean talks have been plagued by
procedural disputes, but this does not appear to be case so far this time,
Mr Han said.
North Korea suggested the summit last week when former US President Jimmy
Carter visited Pyongyang in attempt to mediate in a dispute over
international inspections of North Korean nuclear facilities.
Officials in Seoul believe the summit could be held as early as mid-July and
coincide with a new round of high-level talks between North Korea and the US
to discuss possible diplomatic ties. South Korea has no objection to the
normalisation of US-North Korean relations as long as Pyongyang 'is willing
to fulfil its international obligations and start behaving as normal and
law-abiding nation,' Mr Han said.
The US has suggested it will recognise North Korea if Pyongyang allows the
International Atomic Energy Agency to conduct full inspections of its
nuclear facilities.
In Brussels yesterday, the US and Russia agreed on a common approach towards
a possible United Nations Security Council resolution on sanctions to be
imposed on North Korea over the refusal to allow inspections.
The agreement between Mr Andrei Kozyrev, Russia's foreign minister, and Mr
Warren Christopher, US secretary of state, appeared designed to exert
pressure on Pyongyang to make good its assurances to Mr Carter that it was
willing to freeze its nuclear programme.
'We have developed a common approach towards a sanctions resolution which
will integrate a possible international conference as well,' Mr Christopher
said.
Mr Kozyrev said: 'Right now, we should show quite clearly that sanctions
would be inevitable if North Korea does not take any positive steps.'
Mr Christopher said on Tuesday that the US was ready to put the campaign for
UN sanctions in abeyance if North Korea confirmed the assurances it gave to
Mr Carter.
A senior US official said the proposal agreed with Mr Kozyrev meant an
initial phase of sanctions against North Korea would take effect 30 days
after a resolution was enacted by the Security Council. Mr Kozyrev said:
'These 30 days should be used for the international conference, to avoid the
sanctions which of course are an extreme measure.'
The conference would include representatives of the UN, IAEA, South Korea,
North Korea, China, Japan, Russia and the US, American officials said.
