
The outline agreement between North Korea and the US to defuse the mounting
tension over Pyongyang's nuclear programme is at one level a victory for
quiet diplomacy. North Korea has agreed to suspend its provocative graphite
reactor programme, which is capable of producing weapons-grade plutonium,
and to allow international inspection of its nuclear facilities. In return
it will receive less controversial western water-cooled reactor technology
and diplomatic links to the outside world. The threat of a large scale North
Korean nuclear weapons programme, which was real only a few weeks ago, has
thus receded.
On another level, however, the agreement is an attempt by the US to make the
best of a pretty bad job. Washington's options for pressing Pyongyang to
honour the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty were extremely limited. Direct
military action was probably unrealistic and certainly would have unsettled
regional allies as well as provoking a sharp response from China and Russia;
economic sanctions would have had little impact, given North Korea's near
total isolation from international trade. So instead of sticks, the US has
opted for carrots.
Offering incentives - such as funding of the new nuclear plant by its allies -will buy the US some reassurance: the halting of further plutonium
reprocessing will stop the flow of potential bomb-making material, while the
examination of North Korean sites will allow an audit of the plutonium
produced so far. Yet at heart, this is little more than containment of the
problem. Without deeply intrusive inspections, bound to raise North Korean
hackles, there can be little certainty that some nuclear material does not
remain hidden.
Washington may be reluctant to push the verification issue to the degree
required for absolute certainty, lest the agreement reached so far collapse.
It may make the pragmatic decision that having found itself in a weak
position, the best it can hope for is the near-certainty that the North
Korean nuclear capability remains small.
Still, even if pragmatic, this stance does raise some difficult questions.
At the minimum, the deal rewards bad behaviour by North Korea. At worst, it
shows the US giving in to nuclear blackmail. Other potential nuclear weapons
states will doubtless have noted the sort of concessions which can be wrung
from the US in return for giving up nuclear programmes. First Ukraine
receives a large aid package in return for agreeing to return its nuclear
warheads to Russia. Now North Korea collects for abandoning a nuclear
programme of unknown effectiveness. Who might be next?
Moreover, other countries in the region, from South Korea to Japan, will be
drawing their own lessons from the North Korean experience - not least
concerning the need to deter such threats in future. In the longer term, the
tension in the region remains.
If the value of the agreement is to stop a bad situation getting worse, are
there at least lessons which can be drawn to prevent a repetition of the
problem? One is that the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, up for renewal
next year, badly needs strengthening. The west should continue to honour the
NPT's original offer to make it attractive for countries to renounce the
bomb. At the same time it should step up efforts to prevent the flow of
critical technologies and nuclear fuels to rogue states tempted by nuclear
weapons. Proliferation may be inevitable in the long term, but the NPT still
has a valuable role to play in slowing its progress.
