
A personalised cancer vaccine, using genetic material cloned from the
patient's own tumour cells, is to begin a clinical trial this month.
The trial was approved yesterday by the Medicines Control Agency. It is the
latest example of 'gene therapy' - one of the fastest growing medical
research fields - and the first in which a vaccine is tailor-made for each
individual.
Scientists from the Cancer Research Campaign and Medical Research Council,
working at the MRC Protein Engineering Centre in Cambridge, devised the
approach. It is aimed initially at B-cell lymphoma, a relatively rare cancer
of the lymph nodes affecting about 2,500 people a year in Britain. It could
later be extended to more common cancers.
B-cell lymphoma is especially suitable for treatment with a personal vaccine
because the cancer cells have marker proteins - targets for attack by the
body's immune system - which vary distinctly between individuals.
The experimental procedure involves removing the marker gene from the
patient's lymphoma cells and splicing it into bacteria which make millions
of copies of the gene as they multiply in a culture. The genes are cut out
of the bacteria with special enzymes, purified and injected into the
patient.
The idea, backed by promising results from animal experiments, is that the
re-introduced genes will make relatively large amounts of the cancer marker.
This should stimulate the patient's immune system to attack the cancer cells
more effectively than before.
Ten patients at Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, and the Royal Bournemouth
Hospital will take part in the initial trial. If they respond well the trial
will be extended.
Dr David Secher, drug development director of the Cancer Research Campaign,
said: 'It's important to stress that currently this vaccine is only
appropriate for patients with a particular type of B-cell lymphoma.
'However, our researchers hope that further work may lead to vaccines being
developed for other more common cancers.'
The campaign is testing a non-personalised vaccine for bowel cancer at
Nottingham University. It is also designed to prime the immune system to
attack cancer cells.
The personalisation procedure is far too elaborate for potential commercial
use. It would have to be automated and simplified if designer vaccines were
ever to become a routine treatment.
