
Advertising budgets in many UK companies were scrutinised and then slashed
during the recession. Since then, it is often said, there has been a
profound shift in attitudes at the top of organisations.
The claim is that it is no longer possible - as it often was in the past -
to justify an advertising budget by looking at what has been spent
historically and adding a dollop for good measure. There has been a
permanent shift to 'below-the-line' activity such as sales promotions, while
agencies are increasingly being called to account for their effectiveness.
The truth of these claims is largely borne out by a survey of the largest
advertisers conducted jointly for the Financial Times and the Institute of
Practitioners in Advertising*. Market researchers Audience Selection
interviewed 156 chief executives, finance directors and marketing directors
about attitudes to advertising, as well as wider marketing issues.
However, while there has been a sharpening of scrutiny and more demand for
accountability, there appears to have been no weakening in the long-term
importance of advertising. The IPA concludes that 'despite (advertising)
industry loss of self-confidence, this study serves to reconfirm the value
and status of effective advertising among mainstream advertisers'.
Forty-five per cent of the sample considered that advertising was becoming
more important to their companies, while a further 50 per cent thought there
had been no change. More than three-quarters of the sample disagreed that it
was difficult to argue for an increased budget, although half felt the
pressure was always on ways to reduce spending levels. Over three-quarters
agreed that 'the recession has taught us to question marketing spending more
than we used to'.
Other findings include:
A move to setting advertising budgets on a 'task-related' basis - in other
words, according to the job in hand - rather than principally on historical
precedent. Finance directors, not surprisingly, felt particularly strongly
that this was how budgets should be set: 66 per cent of them, compared with
58 per cent of the overall sample, said task was more important that
precedent. Finance directors were a little more likely than respondents
overall to view advertising as a cost rather than an investment.
Almost universal agreement that highly creative advertising can add value to
a brand and multiply the value of buying airtime and advertising space.
However, there is dissatisfaction with measures used to judge the
effectiveness of an advertising campaign: 18 per cent of the sample (and 26
per cent of finance directors) felt their companies were not measuring
effectiveness competently.
An unwillingness to worship at the advertising altar. Overall, about a
quarter - rising to more than half of finance directors - agreed with the
statement that 'the advertising agency is just another supplier'. This is
not particularly good news for advertising agencies that see themselves as
partners with clients, or hope to reinvent themselves as all-round marketing
consultancies. About two-thirds of the sample disagreed with the comment
that 'some of the best marketing brains are to be found in advertising
agencies'.
Confirmation of the growing power of retailers. More than half agreed that
retailers were becoming a more important focus for marketing activity than
consumers, rising to 61 per cent among marketing directors.
Overwhelming agreement that advertising remains the best tool for long-term
brand building. 'Below-the-line' activity, such as promotions, was seen by
two-thirds as more effective at generating short-term sales gains.
*Copies of the FT/IPA survey are available free from the IPA, 44 Belgrave
Square, London SW1X 8QS
