
The days of double-digit yields on building society accounts are long gone.
Investors seeking income now face a multitude of tempting, often complex,
offers. Over the next few weeks, Weekend Money will examine the most common
options with particular reference to likely yield, risk, charges and tax.
Our chart shows how wide your choice is. But don't just dive in - make sure
you know where you stand and where you are heading. Work out how much income
you need now and how much you expect to need in future. Match these figures
against your expected income from all sources, taking account of factors
such as any automatic increases in pension. How big is the gap? (If there is
no gap, you should probably be concentrating on capital growth, not income).
Work out how much money you have spare to invest after providing fully for
essentials such as pension top-ups. What income do you need to get from that
money to plug your projected income gap? (Do not forget that most types of
income are taxable at your highest rate. If you are a 40 per cent taxpayer
and want an extra income of Pounds 6,000 a year, you normally need an
additional investment income of Pounds 10,000 a year before tax).
As a very rough guide, if your sums suggest that you need a gross investment
yield of 4 per cent or less, you are laughing: virtually all the investments
in our chart will meet that with room to spare. If you need a gross yield of
8 per cent or more, you could well have problems.
You can probably find such a yield (see our highest rates table on Page 8),
but only by investing in something with virtually no scope for capital
growth. So, the real value of your capital and your income is going to be
whittled away gradually by inflation.
If you need a yield of somewhere between 4 and 8 per cent, you will - like
most people - have to compromise. Some of your money probably will have to
be kept in investments offering a high immediate yield but no capital or
income growth. You can, however, afford to have some in index-linked or
equity-related investments which offer better long-term prospects of keeping
pace with inflation.
Decide which characteristics you want in your investments: security of
capital, security of income, both, or neither. Use our chart to find which
types of investment will fit your particular needs. But note that many of
the investments shown have these characteristics only if held for certain
periods. Most are unsuitable for people who might want their money back in a
hurry.
We will be explaining all the different groups of income investments in more
detail over the next few weeks.
