
Philadelphia loves a comeback story. It is a spirit epitomised in the movies
by Rocky Balboa, the washed-up palooka who made the most of his last big
shot to be somebody.
In real life, there is no finer example than the impressive turnround by Sun
Company, one of the stalwarts of Philadelphia's old industrial base.
In 1991, the 108-year-old energy group - the fourth biggest company in the
region - was a flabby under-achiever weighed down by a bloated portfolio of
peripheral businesses. Overall, its operations were producing a meagre 2 per
cent return on equity.
Just two years later, the company is showing a return on equity of 10 per
cent, having transformed itself into a lean contender with good prospects of
sustained growth.
'They have identified where they have the best chance to be profitable,'
says Mr George Baker, an analyst at Merrill Lynch in New York. 'In doing so,
they have gone a long way towards making the company a more focused
enterprise.'
Sun has gone a long way in setting itself apart from its rivals, too. More
than any other big energy group, it has emphasised a commitment to safe and
sustainable environmental practices. It was the first Fortune 500 company to
endorse the principles of the Coalition of Environmentally Responsible
Economies, a non-profit organisation set up after the Exxon Valdez oil-spill
to promote green business policies.
On a smaller scale, Sun has put a human face on its corporate image with
several innovative programmes, including an offer to buy and junk worn-out
cars which are heavy polluters.
In a small step which may symbolise the fresh approach, its headquarters was
brought back to downtown Market Street after 23 years' exile in the suburb
of Radnor. Nostalgia, however, had less to do with the relocation than did a
desire to cut costs.
The move was part of a comprehensive streamlining implemented soon after Mr
Robert Campbell took over as chairman and chief executive in 1992. Under the
new regime, the company has shifted its focus back to its traditional
strengths - refining and marketing in the north-east.
In its core operating region, Sun commands 14 per cent of the retail petrol
trade, the second largest share behind Mobil. Branded petrol accounts for 37
per cent of total sales, by far the company's most important revenue
generator. Sun hopes to build on these strengths.
Concurrently, the group has withdrawn from the areas where it was taking a
beating. It finally threw in the towel on most of its international
exploration operations, after spinning off its US exploration and production
in 1988.
'In drilling for oil and gas, we had a horrible record,' admits Mr Robert
Aiken, chief financial officer. The company is still involved in
international crude production, which remains profitable. Coal mining and
real estate were deemed losing propositions, too.
In Sun's continuing operations, expenses were slashed and the workforce
reduced by 20 per cent to 14,000.
So far, the results have exceeded Mr Campbell's goals. Sun posted operating
profit of Dollars 193m last year, against Dollars 30m ayear earlier. The
figure is well ahead of his target of achieving a Dollars 150m improvement.
The company was again able to tap operating income in paying its dividend,
another of the chairman's ambitions.
Analysts are divided about some of the company's specific moves, and point
out that its recovery is part of cyclical upturn by the industry as a whole.
But most agree that the overall strategy is sound.
Sun wins plaudits for securing long-term leases to operate filling stations
along the Pennsylvania turnpike. The company also gained exclusive rights to
sell petrol along the New Jersey turnpike, perhaps the most travelled
highway in America. The high visibility of operating along such motorways
carries benefits that exceed the revenues they directly generate, analysts
say.
Meanwhile, filling stations in the mid-west have been sold; underperforming
outlets in the north-east have been pared from its 3,000-strong network. A
move to integrate its branded petrol offerings under a single banner -
Sunoco  - is also expected to pay off in higher margins, a critical factor
in petrol retailing, where demand at best grows a scant 1 per cent a year.
The group also put a feather in its cap by agreeing to buy a Chevron
refining plant located on property adjacent to its main Philadelphia
facility. The bargain-basement price of Dollars 170m made the deal an easy
sell, even though the potential environmental remediation costs which Sun
may face have yet to be quantified, says Mr John Hilton, an analyst at Argus
Research in New York.
'Such investments are usually just shots in the dark,' says Mr James
Murchie, who follows the industry for Sanford C Berstein in New York. He
argues that future demand and margins on refined products are nearly
impossible to gauge. Refining, a costly necessity for a marketer of
petroleum products, continues to be a drag on Sun's bottom line, accounting
for Dollars 80m in operating losses last year.
Still, the Chevron acquisition was a safe bet, says Mr Murchie. Indeed, if
the deal had been completed before this winter's deep freeze, which brought
a sharp increase in demand for heating oil, the investment would have
already paid for itself.
