
Advertising can be its own worst enemy. It makes exaggerated claims for its
ability to build brands, the result being that finance directors sometimes
argue that any advertising campaign which fails to increase sales must be
worthless. Why go on spending money, they say, on something that doesn't
work?
Andrew Ehrenberg, research professor of marketing at the South Bank
University Business School in London, wants to see claims for advertising's
power toned down. He is leading a two-year research project on how
advertising really works, backed by more than 20 participants from industry
in the UK and the US, where he is visiting professor at the Stern School,
New York University. Companies taking part include General Motors, CBS,
Procter & Gamble, British Telecommunications, Prudential and Shell.
Ehrenberg and his colleague Neil Barnard argue in a paper on the project
that views about advertising fall into three camps:
Advertising as 'natural ingredient in the marketing mix' - virtually a fixed
cost and assumed to be effective. Research and evaluation are often
dismissed by this camp as fairly pointless. This approach might have been
just about tenable in the early days of marketing but, in more accountable
times, is no longer acceptable.
Advertising as an expense which is only justified when it pays for itself
directly, through increased sales. The dominant position today, this view of
advertising as valid only when it is brand building is a reaction to the
earlier, unaccountable approach.
Ehrenberg and Barnard argue that the position is restrictive and leads to
most advertising being classified as ineffective because, in mature markets,
brands cannot continually enjoy increased sales.
Advertising as a way of maintaining sales of a brand. This is the area on
which Ehrenberg and colleagues want to concentrate in their research
project. They argue that brand building may be the effect of advertising in
certain restricted circumstances, but simply keeping customers should be
advertising's more modest aspiration.
The brand maintenance perspective is not new, but the Ehrenberg team claims
it is neglected and underdeveloped. Little is known about how advertising
works for established brands, and they say that advertising planning is
often based on misconceptions about consumer behaviour.
For example, Ehrenberg and Barnard believe that the nature of brand loyalty
among consumers is often misunderstood and considered to be a much stronger
force than is actually the case. 'Your customers are mostly other people's
customers who occasionally buy you' is a well-established principle of
buying behaviour which, they believe, still surprises many advertising and
marketing professionals.
To make their point about the comparative weakness of brand loyalty,
Ehrenberg and Barnard quote a study of the instant coffee market in the US.
This found that the average brand was bought three times a year by its
customers, while those same customers bought instant coffee nine times a
year on average - in other words, the average brand accounted for just one
third of its customers' instant coffee requirements. Loyalty is nothing more
than a propensity to buy a product, they say.
Ehrenberg says that deflating some of the more exaggerated claims for
advertising and greater understanding of consumer purchasing behaviour
should leave advertising more accountable and therefore in a stronger
position to justify its existence.
