
When a Russian-built Tupolev aircraft, of China Northwest Airlines, crashed
near the historic city of Xian in June, it was not only China's worst air
disaster, it also coincided with festering doubts about Beijing's ability to
manage its flourishing aviation sector.
An appalling safety record - more than 500 people have died in air crashes
since 1992 - had turned the spotlight on lax safety standards, poor
maintenance, sloppy cabin service and virtually non-existent airport
security. In the past year or so, there have been no fewer than a dozen
hijackings to Taiwan of Chinese airliners.
Since the appointment late last year of Mr Chen Guangyi as head of the Civil
Aviation Administration of China (CAAC), the country's aviation regulatory
arm, efforts have intensified to improve safety; but foreign airline
representatives say that China has a long way to go before it can hope to
match international standards.
China's aviation sector simply has grown too fast for available resources:
pilot training, for example, is lagging well behind demand. Among the most
critical problems is a lack of experienced pilots.
China is moving to redress the problem, in co-operation with foreign
airlines such as Lufthansa which has agreed to train Chinese pilots at its
facility in Phoenix, Arizona; but demand is such that it will take years to
provide an adequate supply of pilots.
Growth figures for the aviation sector are staggering. Passenger numbers are
rising at an average of 20 per cent annually, and this is expected to
continue for the next few years; although a credit squeeze slowed the
increase last year to 16.8 per cent from 33 per cent the year before.
Projected Chinese purchases of passenger aircraft should be enough to keep
Airbus Industries and Boeing in business well into next century. In a study,
for an Air Finance conference Chase Manhattan Bank predicts China's
passenger fleet of 350 aircraft will increase fivefold by 2010. This would
require the purchase of 1,200 new aircraft worth USDollars 90bn.
Chase's prediction compares with less optimistic forecasts by, among others,
Boeing which predicts purchases of 800 aircraft and expenditure of UDollars
40bn. Airbus expects China to purchase 620 new aircraft in the next 15
years.
Regardless of who is correct, numbers of aircraft and amounts of money
involved are colossal. Growth in the civil aviation fleet since China began
opening to the world in the late 1970s has been spectacular. In 1974, China
had just 12 passenger aircraft, compared with the 350 today.
Boeing, followed by Airbus and McDonnell Douglas, have been the chief
beneficiaries. Boeing delivered 46 airliners to China last year - 14 per
cent of its production. This year, it expects to deliver 36, or 14 per cent
of a lower production. Negotiations are also well advanced for the purchase
of a further 50 Boeings, including the new 777 two-engined widebody, at a
cost of about UDollars 5bn.
Airbus, too, is making a stronger showing in the China market. The European
consortium secured orders last year worth UDollars 1.2bn. Three airlines -
China Eastern in Shanghai, China Northwest in Xian and China Northern in
Shenyang - are now operating Airbus.
Other suppliers of aviation equipment are also benefiting from China's
aviation expansion. Rolls-Royce, for example, is supplying 42 of its
RB211-535 engines for Boeing 757s on order by Chinese airlines and is
expecting further orders.
While China is spending billions of dollars on the purchase of new
top-of-the-range aircraft, it is far from maximising returns on investment.
The Chase Manhattan study reported that China's average aircraft utilisation
rate was 5.2 hours a day in 1992, up from 4.7 the year before. This compares
with 11 for Singapore Airlines.
Among factors curtailing utilisation is the primitive state of Chinese
infrastructure, including airports and air traffic control systems. Only 40
of China's airports have instrument-landing systems, which means that bad
weather often causes delays, and thus disruption to the entire network.
A striking feature has been the proliferation of new regional operators.
China now has more than 30 airlines. This regionalisation of the aviation
sector has placed a huge burden on CAAC's overstretched regulatory
abilities. On the other hand, the growth of regional carriers has added a
dynamic to the sector which would not have been possible if the CAAC
monopoly had been maintained.
The regional airlines are also spreading their wings beyond China, opening
routes to international destinations such as Singapore and Thailand. Several
are seeking capital abroad, to fund ambitious expansion plans. China
Southern, based in Guangzhou, and China Eastern are among 22 Chinese
companies approved for listing on overseas stock markets.
In its efforts to secure expertise and capital, China recently announced it
was opening its airline industry to foreign investment, though foreign
involvement in a mainland airline would be restric - ted to 35 per cent with
voting rights capped at 25 per cent.
Foreign investors were also being urged to invest in airport facilities such
as terminals, ground-handling and aircraft maintenance. Indeed, foreign
carriers are already becoming more involved.
British Airways recently formed a joint engineering venture with China
Southern; Lufthansa has a joint venture maintenance facility in Beijing with
Air China; and Singapore Airlines has concluded a joint-venture agreement
with the Beijing Airport Authority for inflight kitchen services and ground
handling facilities.
China's aviation sector is in flux, and the learning curve is proving to be
steep.
