
The US was trying yesterday to secure the return of a captured army pilot
and the body of his co-pilot after their helicopter was shot down in North
Korea. The incident prompted US calls for a suspension of aid programmes.
It came at an awkward time for both countries, following their recent
agreement to halt Pyongyang's nuclear programme in exchange for the opening
of diplomatic ties and economic aid.
President Bill Clinton said in a statement released by the White House that
the helicopter had 'strayed into North Korean airspace' on Saturday. He
declared that the 'tragic loss of life was unnecessary' and that 'we are
using all available channels to press for an early resolution of this
matter'. The situation is potentially embarrassing to the US because the
helicopter appeared to violate the truce agreement that ended the 1950-53
Korean war. Aircraft from either side are not supposed to fly near the
demilitarised zone between North and South Korea, let alone cross it.
Mr William Perry, US defence secretary, said the helicopter, which was on a
training mission, had strayed into North Korea because of a navigational
error. North Korea claimed that it then shot down the helicopter.
Republican Senator Pete Domenici, incoming budget committee chairman, said
yesterday that unless North Korea co-operated over the incident, the US
should not hand over funds promised for building safer nuclear reactors.
Democratic Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan was asked if the helicopter issue
should prompt the US to delay implementation of the nuclear deal.
'That is exactly what the (North) Koreans should be asking,' he replied.
'They are not exactly in an enviable position, are they? Their dictator (the
late President Kim Il Sung) is dead. Their economy is dead.'
Analysts believe that North Korea may try to use the incident for propaganda
purposes and to extract new concessions from the US. But North Korea is
unlikely to try to use returning the pilot as a bargaining chip as this
would give conservative US critics of the recent nuclear accord extra
reasons for opposing it.
North Korean officials have recently expressed concern that the new
Republican-controlled Congress may try to block the nuclear pact, which
critics believe offers too many concessions to Pyongyang.
The US has called for a meeting of the military armistice commission, which
supervises the truce, to discuss the situation. But North Korea may refuse
to attend: it withdrew from the commission earlier this year in an attempt
to pressure the US to sign a peace treaty to end the Korean war formally.
North Korea may use the current visit to Pyongyang of Mr Bill Richardson, a
Democratic representative from New Mexico, to arrange the pilot's release.
Mr Richardson yesterday held talks with senior North Korean officials on the
helicopter incident.
