
A breakthrough in delicate bilateral talks between China and Taiwan
yesterday helped the two countries reach their first substantive political
agreements since nationalist Chinese forces fled the mainland in 1949.
Eight days of talks in Taiwan ended with agreement to repatriate airline
hijackers and illegal immigrants, and on ways to resolve fishing disputes.
The leaders of both the Chinese and the Taiwanese delegations to the talks
described their agreements as a 'major breakthrough'. A previous attempt to
establish a political dialogue between the two countries in Singapore in
1993 failed.
This time, said Mr Tang Shubei, Beijing's chief delegate at the Taipei talks
and vice-president of the Chinese semi-official body that handles relations
with Taiwan, 'both sides tried to understand the position and views of the
other'. The agreements would be signed at a later, unspecified date by more
senior officials, the two negotiators said.
Under the agreements, hijackers will be repatriated and dealt with in
accordance with the laws of their country of origin. Illegal immigrants may
be repatriated within 20 days after their identity has been established.
China has previously refused to recognise the jurisdiction of Taiwanese
courts.
On the fishing issue, both sides agreed that government vessels from both
sides should be able to mediate in disputes between fishing boats.
The breakthrough appears to have been possible because both sides avoided
addressing sensitive issues concerning sovereignty which have proved a
stumbling block in past talks. Beijing does not officially recognise the
Kuomintang government on Taiwan, while Taiwan has consistently rejected
Beijing's efforts to secure reunification.
However, the Taiwanese government is privately anxious to dispel any idea
that a successful round of meetings might imply the two sides are moving
towards reunification, observers said.
Although the arrival of the mainland Chinese team in Taiwan was accompanied
by sporadic protests, the suave Mr Tang, the highest-ranking Chinese
official to visit Taiwan in 45 years, became so popular with the Taiwanese
news media that the government felt compelled to warn newspapers and
television not to cover him too closely.
Expectations ahead of the talks were quite low on the Taiwanese side. But
Beijing, anxious to mend fences after the March 31 robbery-murder of 24
Taiwanese tourists in China, which plunged ties to the lowest level in
years, apparently granted Mr Tang leeway to make concessions.
