
Peugeot Citroen yesterday provided evidence of the French car industry
recovery while announcing the strengthening of its product range and net
profits of FFr688m (Pounds 82.5m) for the first half of the year, compared
with a loss of FFr1.12bn in the same period in 1993.
The results were at the lower end of analysts' forecasts, but Peugeot
Citroen predicted further improvement and a 'clear positive result' for the
full year. It said the improvement would be partly based on the impact of
its revamped model range which would offset a slowdown in growth in the
automobile market in the second half of the year.
According to Peugeot Citroen, the slowdown partly reflects the weakening of
stimulatory measures introduced by the French government. The measures,
which were introduced in February and included a payment of FFr5,000 to car
owners who traded in vehicles more than 10 years old to buy a new one,
helped lift sales in the first half. Combined with an end to recession in
France and other European markets, the measures had prompted a 14.8 per cent
increase in sales to FFr83.8bn.
Peugeot Citroen, said its improvement reflected the impact of new models,
from utility vehicles to the estate version of the Citroen ZX and the
Peugeot 306 convertible. In addition, the first half of the year saw the
launch of the group's multi-purpose vehicles, the Peugeot 806 and Citroen
Evasion.
The group raised its share of the western European market from about 11.9
per cent to 12.5 per cent. In France, market share increased from an average
of 30.3 per cent in the first half of 1993 to about 32.8 per cent.
Improved cash flow and a tighter control on investments allowed the company
to reduce debts. At the end of June, group debts stood at FFr9.34bn,
compared with FFr16.67bn at the beginning of the year. At the operating
level, Peugeot Citroen reported a profit of FFr2.45bn, compared with a loss
of FFr1.25bn last time.
Despite an upbeat assessment of the company's performance, Peugeot Citroen
expressed caution about the prospects for the European market. It pointed
out that although the 6.48m new registrations in the first half represented
a growth rate of 6.7 per cent over the first half of 1993, the total volume
still represented a fall of almost 12 per cent compared with the first half
of 1992.
The company was also cautious about the second half, saying 'growth in
western European automobile demand should be much slower. Growth in
passenger car registrations for the full year was likely to slip to about 4
per cent in western Europe and 12 per cent in France.
