
The California Supreme Court has ruled that insurance companies must pay
rebates, expected to top Dollars 1bn (Pounds 645m), to millions of car and
home insurance policyholders in the state.
The ruling appears to end six years of legal wrangling between the state and
the insurance industry over the constitutionality of Proposition 103, an
insurance reform initiative approved by voters in 1988. The initiative
called for insurance companies to lower their premiums and submit to a
state-regulated system for approving rate increases.
The court unanimously ruled that a formula for calculating property and
casualty rate reductions devised by Mr John Garamendi, the state insurance
commissioner, does not violate the constitutional rights of insurance
companies.
The court also said that the state had the right to impose a 10 per cent
profit ceiling on the entire insurance industry.
The ruling was on a test case involving 20th Century Insurance of Los
Angeles, which may now be required to make refunds totalling Dollars 119m.
Mr Garamendi said that the ruling granted him the power to immediately order
insurance companies to pay rebates of about Dollars 1bn. It also affirmed
his authority to adopt industry-wide regulations to prevent excessive rate
increases.
A total of 35 insurance companies have already issued refunds totalling
about Dollars 800m, the insurance commission said. However, two of the
largest insurers in California, State Farm Insurance and the Farmers
Insurance Group, have yet to pay any refunds.
State Farm owes Dollars 436m in rebates, according to the state's insurance
department.
However, Farmers Insurance, part of the BAT group, said that it had not
received an order to make rebates from the state insurance commissioner and
was confident its rates were fair. 'We do not believe that we will have to
issue rebates,' a spokesman said.
But state officials are expected to move quickly to issue rebate orders
following the state supreme court decision.
'The State Supreme Court's decision is a landmark victory for the people of
California,' Mr Garamendi said. 'The court's ruling allows us to order
outstanding rebates paid to consumers who have waited six years for them,
and enables us to proceed with implementing safeguards from rising insurance
rates in the future.'
Meanwhile, insurance industry officials said that some companies were now
reviewing other options, including ceasing to offer property and casualty
insurance in California.
'Basically, the court is saying that insurance companies are not welcome in
this state,' said the Personal Insurance Federation, an industry trade
group.
