
This will be the last of these columns for a while. I am being catapulted
forward in time, to join the Monday FT, so Hawks & Handsaws is going into
storage, together with its best-loved character: Miss Lee, my executive
assistant.
I broke the news to her on Thursday, in a restaurant near Chelsea barracks,
a place so fashionable that the bill for two people is always Pounds 130,
whatever they eat or drink.
During the past four years Miss Lee has established a place of great
affection in readers' hearts. Last Christmas she received more cards than I
did. She has been invited to numerous functions, and to address school
prize-days.
Miss Lee's popularity has been based on the fact that she appeals equally to
men and women. Women like her because she is a Thatcherite Yorkshirewoman of
immense poise and style who speaks her mind plainly, wears stupendously
expensive clothes and exhibits minimal tolerance of male fears and foibles.
Strange to relate, men seem to like her for exactly the same reasons.
But now she is headed for storage. When I told Miss Lee in the restaurant
that she and Hawks & Handsaws were going into the cold store, there was an
instant sprinkling of tears and a dabbing of ivory cheeks. But that was just
the waiters.
Miss Lee remained composed. 'Well, Michael,' she said. 'I suppose there are
elements of the readership that will miss your pensees creuses, but
remember: pietra mossa non fa muschio. A rolling stone gathers no moss, or,
indeed, gravitas. There were signs, just lately, that your Saturday morning
drolleries were acquiring some shape, the first suggestion of weight.
'In particular, you seemed to have dropped your campaign against John Major
and the Conservative party, and to have switched your eyeless gaze towards a
far more deserving target: boy-scout Blair and his new-model Labour party.
When Tony Blair comes to power, if he comes to power, we shall know whom to
blame: whippersnappers like you whiffling in the wind, fomenting unrest,
unable to see that John Major is all that stands between us and the
bottomless pit.'
I said: 'If that is only half true, I reckon we should jump. Why is it, Miss
Lee, that conservative-minded souls nurse the belief that they know what's
best? The only hate-mail Hawks & Handsaws has received has been from
far-right conservatives - anonymous and scurrilous, penned in mauve ink.
What produces this hatred?'
'Dislike of namby-pambiness.'
I said: 'That's not much of a reason. As for John Major, whenever I see his
name I think of what the American writer Wendell Berry said. From our point
of view, said Berry, the difference between the mind of a human being and
that of a mountain goat is wonderful. From the point of view of the infinite
ignorance that surrounds us, the difference is not impressive.'
Miss Lee said: 'Any more pick-of-the-pensees from four years of
column-writing?'
'Well,' I said gamely, relishing her tartness, which is about to go into
storage. 'Not long ago I had lunch with another FT columnist. This was most
unusual. On austere newspapers such fraternising is rare. Columnists eye
each other cagily and pass by on the other side.
'However, I and this person were having lunch, and I said that I often
regretted that in a column of 720 words it was hard to do justice to
complicated subjects like human over-population, which is killing the planet -that all you could do was make a few points without really getting round
to formulating solutions.
'And this guy said - he is really extremely bright - that columnists weren't
there to provide reams of analysis or draw up legislation, but to lob a few
well-directed grenades into the seething mess of human affairs and hope for
the best.
'I could see that he was right. But then I thought: as a species, we have
analysed everything that is wrong with us. We know all about our mistakes,
yet we are making more and more of them. The faster we lob grenades, the
faster they come back at us. We are rushing towards our end, Miss Lee, of
that I am quite convinced.'
Miss Lee smiled brilliantly, and signalled to a waiter. 'Michael,' she said
gently. 'You are speaking for yourself.'
