
As Christmas approaches, the Bundesbank is making those who analyse its
every action wait a little before they can relax into festive mood.
First, they will have to digest all the German central bank has to offer
this week in the way of economic analysis, monetary performance and policy
targets.
Among economists, a debate is raging as to whether the German central bank
will start raising official interest rates soon, wait until late next year
or beyond, or manage one more reduction in the present economic cycle. They
are hoping for clues when the Bundesbank announces its 1995 money supply
target on Thursday. Most economists expect gradual rises in rates from the
second half of next year; a cut at this stage would unsettle bond markets.
Yesterday, the bank offered some seasonal cheer with its monthly report.
This highlighted the strength of the economic upturn, welcomed the fall in
the public sector deficit - expected to decrease by some DM20bn (Pounds
8.1bn) this year to around DM115bn - and said west German inflation could
decline to below 2.5 per cent early next year.
Figures are also expected shortly showing that growth in M3, the broad
monetary aggregate, eased further to an annualised rate of just over 6 per
cent in November. This would still leave M3 slightly above the 1994 target
range of between 4 and 6 per cent, but mark the continuation of a huge
improvement on the overblown growth rates in the first half of the year.
At Thursday's meeting, therefore, the consensus is that the target level for
1995 will be roughly the same.
But beyond that, economists' opinions diverge sharply. The Bundesbank has
calmed markets by holding open all possibilities.
'The hope that something could come in the way of rate cuts has never been
taken from the market,' noted Mr Hermann Remsperger, chief economist at
BHF-Bank in Frankfurt. The last reduction in official rates was in May, when
the discount and Lombard rates were cut by half a percentage point each to
4.5 and 6 per cent respectively.
Then, the aim was to slow the alarming acceleration in M3 growth by
encouraging investors to move funds from short-term deposits to longer term
instruments. 'Looking back on 1994,' added Mr Remsperger, 'I would say the
Bundesbank's experiment of using rate cuts to brake money supply growth has
succeeded.'
Ms Alison Cottrell, London-based economist at Kidder Peabody of the US, also
believes the Bundesbank is trying to keep markets happy.
'They want to keep the hope of rate cuts alive all the time. That's the
reason they're not cutting.' Nor does she see any pressing reason for
further reductions now. She expects renewed tightening in late summer or
autumn next year.
Neither she nor Mr Remsperger totally exclude the possibility of a cut early
next year, though.
Among those arguing strongly for such a move is Dresdner Bank. 'There
remains a good chance that the Bundesbank will cut the discount rate once
again,' the bank's research arm said. Admitting its view was controversial,
it cited the improving monetary and inflation situation (including the
prospect of moderate wage deals).
Taking the opposite view is Goldman Sachs, the US investment bank. Its
Frankfurt-based economists have criticised the Bundesbank's rate cuts and
what they call its 'liberal interpretation' of the monetary target in 1994.
Thus they see the need for 'a moderate increase in official interest rates
in the course of 1995'.
Mr Remsperger sees the truth as lying someway between the two. For him, the
importance of Thursday's meeting will be more in what the Bundesbank says
about M3 performance and targets than in the actual figures. 'An unchanged
M3 goal will send the message that the Bundesbank takes account of the
overshooting of the target and intends to correct this.'
Although the link between M3 and future inflation is not always clear, some
economists feel the Bundesbank should tighten policy early as a precaution
against any speeding up of inflation in 1996. Mr Martin Hufner, economist at
Bayerische Vereinsbank, says interest rates should go up in the first half
of 1995.
For Ms Cottrell, however, it will be fiscal policy that determines when, and
if, rates rise next year. If both the consolidation of the federal budget
and wage trends look like getting out of hand, she thinks the Bundesbank
could use interest rate rises as a 'psychological tool' to knock sense into
politicians and wage bargainers.
Undoubtedly, the central bank continues to take M3 seriously, despite
criticism from those who feel it has wavered from the true monetary path.
Thus the Bundesbank is likely to underscore its commitment to monetary
targeting when it sets its 1995 range for M3 on Thursday. Then the Christmas
celebrations can begin.
Editorial Comment, Page 15
