
German money supply grew at 13.7 per cent a year in May, down from 15.4 per
cent in April.
The headline figure for the M3 measure of monetary growth was better than
market expectations and the month on month increase was at its lowest level
since November last year. Between April and May, M3 grew by 0.5 per cent.
The figures were encouraging for the Bundesbank, facing a credibility
problem with financial markets after runaway monetary growth in the past six
months. But economists warned the reduction in M3 growth could be temporary
and that there was no chance the central bank would meet its 4 to 6 per cent
target for M3 growth in the year.
The improvement in the figures reflected one-off factors such as the removal
of the Bundesbank's profit which had inflated the previous month's data. But
bank lending continued to rise last month and capital formation did not
improve, boding ill for monetary development in coming months.
Bank lending, a key factor behind monetary growth and potentially a trigger
for future inflation, rose by 9.9 per cent over the previous six months on
an annualised basis, an increase from the 9.5 per cent rate in May. Capital
formation stagnated at the same level as in the previous month. The
Bundesbank blamed 'special factors' for continuing high levels of monetary
growth, especially the world-wide uncertainty over interest rates which had
caused an 'investment blockage' as investors left funds on short-term
deposit rather than returning to bonds.
However economists disputed whether the state of the world capital markets
could be described as a special factor and called on the Bundesbank to make
a clear statement of its monetary policy aims.
As Mr Hans Tietmeyer, Bundesbank president, insisted last week, M3 remains
the German central bank's most trusted guide to future inflationary
developments. A credibility problem has arisen because the central bank has
cut interest rates aggressively despite the fact that money supply has
overshot its target in each of the past two years and is virtually certain
to do so again this year.
Some economists say interest rates should be raised to bring M3 down, but
the Bundesbank said its most recent discount rate cut would encourage
investors away from short-term deposits into long-term investments, turning
conventional monetary wisdom on its head.
The figures released yesterday were too early to have been influenced by the
new policy, but economists warned the current state of world financial
markets is likely to have prevented the desired shift in assets from taking
place.
'There could be a further acceleration in M3 growth in June as a result,'
said Mr Holger Fahrinkrug at Schweizerische Bankgesellschaft/UBS in
Frankfurt.
'This would put the Bundesbank's whole strategy into disarray,' he said.
Mr Tietmeyer may take up the issue at a Bundesbank press conference in
Potsdam tomorrow.
Bundesbank council member Mr Lothar Muller will resign from his position as
head of the regional central bank in Bavaria at the end of June, the
regional central bank said.
