
Demand for the first drug proven to have an effect against multiple
sclerosis, Betaseron, outstrips supply to such an extent that a lottery is
used to decide which patients should receive it.
When Schering of Germany launched Betaseron last September in the US, the
only country in which it is licensed for sale, doctors registered 80,000 MS
patients who wanted the drug. The company's computer then picked 15,000 at
random to begin treatment, at a cost of Dollars 9,500 (Pounds 6,500) a year
each.
Schering's US subsidiary, Berlex, says 20,000 patients are now receiving
injections of Betaseron - a form of beta-interferon - and a further 20,000
are preparing to start treatment. Chiron, the Californian biotechnology
company which manufactures Betaseron for Berlex from genetically engineered
bacteria, is increasing production rapidly; it forecasts that the US waiting
list will have disappeared by 1995.
Schering hopes to submit a European licence application for Betaseron next
month. European supplies will be manufactured by Germany's Boehringer
Ingelheim.
Meanwhile two competing beta-interferons, developed by Ares-Serono of
Switzerland and Biogen of the US, are moving through clinical trials in MS
patients. Ian Broadhurst, a pharmaceutical analyst with BNP Capital Markets,
predicts that Betaseron will not enjoy more than two years free from
competition, though it could still bring Schering DM600m (Pounds 250m) in
sales in 1995.
Besides the interferons, many other 'new generation' MS drugs are at various
stages of research and development. A BNP report last month listed 25
commercial R&D projects in progress around the world; the most advanced are
shown in the table. Together they represent progress on a broad front
against MS, the most common disease of the nervous system in young adults,
which affects an estimated 2m people worldwide.
Effective MS treatments could give the pharmaceutical industry a huge new
market. Potential US sales are Dollars 1.8bn a year, according to an
estimate by Genetic Technology News, a biotechnology newsletter.
Although the precise molecular cause of MS is not yet known, scientists
agree that it is an auto-immune disease in the same broad category as
rheumatoid arthritis and diabetes. The body's immune system, which is
intended to defend it against germs and other foreign invaders, turns
against its own cells. The self-attack is probably triggered by a
combination of genetic and environmental factors.
In MS, white blood cells (T-cells) destroy the protein sheath called myelin
which protects nerve fibres. This stops the nerves working properly and the
patient begins to lose control of muscles. Symptoms include partial
paralysis, blurred vision and speech difficulties.
But the progress of MS is variable. In the worst cases of
'chronic-progressive MS' the neurological problems become steadily more
severe and eventually kill the patient. In 'relapsing-remitting MS' the
disease flares up at unpredictable intervals - and may even disappear
spontaneously.
Neither beta-interferon nor the other experimental drugs can cure MS but,
for the first time, they do promise a significant amelioration in the
disease. Until now, doctors have only been able to offer patients 'comfort
therapy' such as pain-killers and anti-inflammatory drugs, which control
some of the symptoms but have no effect on the underlying disease.
MS specialists such as George Ebers, a Canadian neurologist at the
University Hospital, London, Ontario, are understandably cautious about
claims for new treatments because 'there have been so many false dawns -
therapies which have been widely used but found on further study to be
ineffective'. For example, hyperbaric oxygen treatment (subjecting the
patient to high pressure oxygen) became fashionable in the 1970s and was
discredited in the 1980s.
Researchers also claimed success with drugs such as cyclophosphamide and
cyclosporin, which suppress the patient's whole immune system, but these too
turned out to be ineffective against MS when tested properly. The only
acceptable clinical test is a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled
trial: patients are divided at random into two groups, one of which receives
the drug and the other an identical dummy, and neither patients nor
investigators know until the end who is getting what.
Tested under those conditions on patients with relapsing-remitting MS,
Betaseron reduced the number of attacks by one third and reduced
significantly the amount of nerve damage shown by magnetic resonance
imaging. But, as Ian McDonald of London University's Institute of Neurology
points out, Betaseron has not yet been shown to have any effect on patients'
long-term development of disability.
Interferons are natural proteins which perform a wide range of functions,
including modulating the immune system. All three kinds - alpha, beta and
gamma - have been tested on MS. Alpha had no effect, while gamma made the
disease worse; scientists now believe natural gamma-interferon may play a
role in the progression of MS.
It is not clear how beta-interferon brings about an improvement. According
to Ares-Serono, it may both decrease the activity of the immune cells that
destroy myelin and counteract the disease-enhancing effects of
gamma-interferon.
The Ares-Serono and Biogen beta-interferons differ slightly from Betaseron.
They are made by genetically engineered mammalian cells, rather than by
bacteria cultures. As a result they have sugar chains on the protein
surface, like natural human interferon but unlike the Schering product. In
theory this could give them a clinical advantage - in terms of fewer
side-effects and improved efficacy - but there is no evidence to show
whether they work better in practice.
Most of the other MS treatments under development aim to disable the
specific part of the immune system that is responsible for MS, without
suppressing the other immune functions that are essential for fighting
disease. Those most advanced in the development process include:
Deoxyspergualin (DSG), a natural bacterial extract discovered by Nippon
Kayaku in Japan and developed by Hoechst of Germany. It suppresses harmful
T-cells and may also stimulate the regrowth of damaged myelin. If clinical
trial results due next month are encouraging, Hoechst will apply for a
marketing licence. Regulatory approval could follow quickly since DSG is not
a genetically engineered product.
Myloral, a formulation of bovine (cow) myelin, developed by AutoImmune, a
Massachusetts biotechnology company. It is an 'oral tolerance therapy'. The
patient is fed the protein so that the immune system comes to tolerate it
and therefore is less inclined to attack his or her own myelin. After
promising early results, Myloral is now in large-scale clinical trials.
Copolymer-1 (Cop-1), a synthetic chemical resembling myelin protein,
developed by Teva in Israel. When injected into the patient, this decoy
attracts the immune cells away from the real myelin. It is in the final
stage of clinical trials.
At earlier stages of development, the biotechnology industry is testing
several experimental drugs, including antibodies and vaccines. These are
aimed either at specific types of T-cell which the researchers believe are
responsible for the immune attack in MS or at 'antigens' in the myelin which
provoke the attack.
However, there is vigorous debate between MS specialists about whether the
fundamental defect lies in a very narrow sub-group of T-cells - in which
case a specific drug could in theory cure the disease - or whether a wider
range of immune cells are responsible. If so, MS will be harder to treat.
Ebers inclines to the latter view. Even so, he says, 'the mood, among a
sceptical audience, is now approaching optimism'.
The series continues next month with a look at blood products.
Articles over the last six months have looked at pharmaceutical
advances in the following areas:
Sepsis 31 March
Prostate 25 February
Wound healing 21 January
Obesity 23 December
Contraceptives 12 November
Anaesthetics 15 October -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Multiple Sclerosis selected drugs in clinical trials -----------------------------------------------------------------------
COMPANY           COUNTRY        LEAD COMPOUND         POSSIBLE LAUNCH -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Anergen           US             MHC Peptide Complex         1999
Ares-Serono       Switzerland    beta interferon             1996
AutoImmune        US             AI-100 (bovine myelin)      1996
Biogen            US             beta interferon             1995
Cel-Sci           US             T-cell vaccine              1998
Celtrix           US             TGF-B2                      1998
Hoechst           Germany        deoxyspergualin (DSG)       1995
Icos              US             23F2G MAb                   1999
Immune Response   US             AI-208                      1999
Schering          Germany        beta interferon             1993
Teva              Israel         Copolymer-1                 1995 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: BNP Group Equity Research -----------------------------------------------------------------------
