
Hopes rose yesterday for a long-awaited breakthrough in the dispute between
the US and North Korea over Pyongang's nuclear programme.
South Korea's foreign minister, Mr Han Sung-joo, said in Seoul that
agreement could be announced within a few days.
But in Geneva - where the two countries have been discussing a pact under
which North Korea would accept full nuclear inspections in return for
improved ties with the US - officials said there were still key difficult
details to be agreed and any announcement was unlikely before next week.
Under the agreement, North Korea would abandon its nuclear programme by
replacing its dangerous graphite reactors with safer light-water models
supplied from South Korea, which would help finance the Dollars 4bn project.
The US and North Korea have apparently made rapid progress since Wednesday
after three weeks of largely futile talks.
Mr Han suggested that North Korea's recent flexibility might be linked to
possible assumption of power this weekend by Mr Kim Jong-il, the successor
and son of the late President Kim Il-sung.
Under the proposed pact, North Korea would accept international inspections
of its undeclared nuclear facilities, including two suspected nuclear waste
dumps, once the core equipment for the new light-water reactors are
delivered in two to three years.
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) wants to examine the waste
facilities to determine whether Pyongyang reprocessed enough plutonium in
1989 for one or two nuclear bombs.
North Korea triggered the nuclear dispute in March 1993 by rejecting the
IAEA demand, and suspended its membership in the nuclear non-proliferation
treaty (NPT).
The US and North Korea will establish diplomatic liaison offices within six
months if Pyongyang returns to the NPT.
The US-designed light-water reactors to be supplied to North Korea produce
less weapons-grade plutonium than Pyongyang's current graphite models.
Energy-short North Korea will suspend construction of two 50MW and 200MW
reactors and stop operation of its 5MW reactor in return for alternative
electricity supplies, which will last until the light-water reactors are
completed in eight to 10 years.
North Korea would also keep in dry storage 8,000 plutonium-rich fuel rods
that were removed in May from its nuclear reactor. They would be taken to a
third country for reprocessing once the first of the two light-water reactor
units are completed.
Officials from the two countries were meeting yesterday to resolve several
issues, including linking the resumption of inter-Korean talks to the
proposed accord.
South Korea, worried about being isolated from the negotiations, wants talks
with North Korea by mid-January to discuss the implementation of their 1991
non-nuclear treaty.
Pyongyang is so far refusing the South Korean request, which is being
supported by the US.
Mr Lee Hong-koo, the South Korean deputy prime minister for unification,
indicated that his government would accept the agreement if inter-Korean
talks were guaranteed.
But he acknowledged that there had been disagreements between Seoul and
Washington over details of the proposed agreement, although 'there is no
difference on overall principles.'
South Korean officials are unhappy that full nuclear inspections will be
delayed for a few years since this could give North Korea additional time to
develop at least one nuclear bomb from the plutonium that it is suspected to
have already reprocessed.
At the Geneva discussions, US and North Korean experts were contining to
wrangle over final touches to their accord, according to a US official. Once
the wording was agreed, the pact would be referred back to the respective
governments, a process which could take several days.
