
There were no fire crackers at yesterday's launch of Chinatrust
International Securities, the first Taiwanese investment bank to open for
business in the City of London. But that there was going to be plenty of
other razzmatazz was clear even before the official ceremony began.
Dr Jeffrey Koo, chairman of the new bank's parent in Taipei, picked his way
from room to room past a myriad of bright paper decorations and extravagant
floral displays while a brown and white police spaniel checked the premises
for bombs ahead of the arrival of his honoured guest - Lady Thatcher, the
former UK prime minister.
It was not a bad show for a group whose total banking assets are still only
Dollars 18bn, but then Chinatrust, which aims to become a global business
with a position in the ranks of the world's top 100 banks, is strikingly
long on ambition.
Founded with capital of just Dollars 2m in 1966, the parent bank only
acquired a Taiwanese commercial banking licence two years ago and is already
spreading its wings across Asia. It helps that Chinatrust is the flagship
financial vehicle of the Koo family, reckoned to be the second richest
family in Taiwan, whose industrial interests range from cement to
petrochemicals, hotels and cable television.
The ebullient Dr Koo, who is a senior adviser to Taiwan's prime minister and
says he met Lady Thatcher over dinner when she visited Taipei, obviously
knows how to cultivate connections. These will doubtless be put to good use
in the UK. The new investment bank aims to help Taiwanese companies raise
capital abroad through the issue of convertible bonds, to channel portfolio
investment into the Taiwanese market as well as to manage Taiwanese
investments in Europe.
It is a daunting task because, unlike the foreign securities companies which
are now established in Taipei, Chinatrust lacks securities distribution
capacity in Europe.
But Dr Koo says distribution will always be a problem for new entrants to
the market. London is a good place to start because about 30 to 40 per cent
of foreign investment in Taiwanese equities originates in the City.
Chinatrust believes it can sell its services on the basis of the quality of
its research. 'We can offer good advice to UK investors,' he says.
The limit on foreign investment in the Taiwanese market, set presently at
Dollars 7.5bn, should not be a problem. There is room for another Dollars
2bn in investments and the limit will be increased when the ceiling is
reached, he says confidently. It is simply that the pace has to be
controlled. 'When Japan started to liberalise it took them 10 years. We are
doing it at a very fast pace.'
Perhaps, however, Chinatrust will make its main initial mark in the bond
market. Dr Koo believes the interest of Taiwanese companies in issuing
convertible eurobonds is large and growing. While the Taiwanese government
controls the country's Dollars 90bn in foreign reserves, it is relatively
hard for private sector companies to raise foreign currency from domestic
banks.
The risk is that Taiwanese companies will set out on an issuing spree
similar to that undertaken by Japanese companies in the 1980s. As they
latched on to the low cost of borrowing in this way, the market became
saturated with paper which eventually proved a poor investment as the stock
market slid.
Yet Dr Koo believes there is a difference. Whereas Taiwanese companies tend
to raise funds for specific projects, many Japanese issuers were simply
following the herd. 'When the bubble economy burst, they still had to bear
the cost no matter how cheap the money.
'The Taiwanese will never do that. They are more pragmatic. They will never
raise funds just to feel comfortable.'
