
February is supposed to be the dry season in Tanzania. Yet Kilimanjaro,
Africa's highest mountain, remained veiled in ominous mist as we drove
towards it out of Kenya. Only when we reached its lowest slopes did the old
volcano bare a shoulder.
We piled out of the bus and gazed up at it. The ridge of ice and black lava
seemed miles up. It was in fact three vertical miles above where we stood.
What on earth had persuaded 12 tourists that they could walk up that?
The answer was Jean-Pierre Brain, a 50-year-old French insurance executive.
In normal life, he limited himself to packing opera festivals with
middle-aged friends. Now he had coaxed 11 of them, including one Englishman,
to share his mid-life crisis and climb Kilimanjaro in style.
Dressed more like a golfer than a mountaineer, Jean-Pierre thrust his jaw at
the distant summit, as if wondering whether a two-iron would do the trick.
The mountain veiled itself again, and stayed hidden from us, bar the odd
glimpse, for the next four days.
That was on a Sunday evening. By the following Thursday night two of those
three vertical miles were below us, and our doubts had become the disbelief
of people about to mount the scaffold. It was midnight. We were being given
'early morning tea' in tents perched on a ridge of shattered rock 16,000ft
up.
The incessant rain that never falls on Kilimanjaro in February had been
replaced by the driving snow that so rarely dusts its upper slopes,
according to the notes on the Ordnance Survey map. In the ghastly light of
miners' lamps strapped to our foreheads, we pulled on every stitch of
clothing we had, and struggled, sick and white-faced, out into the night.
Our capable French tour-guide, Eric Christin, had already told us what to
expect. 'We will climb steeply and slowly for seven hours. We will stick
together behind the Tanzanian guide in one group. This will require
will-power. Some of you will vomit. If you really cannot go on, tell me and
I will send you down with a guide.'
The chain-gang set off, at a pace so slow that we joked about it at first.
We climbed disembodiedly, inching our personal circles of light up a
never-ending snow-slope of 45 degrees. The huge volcanic cone of Kilimanjaro
remained invisible above and below us.
Thin and frigid air whistled in and out of our lungs, one breath per step.
The French chit-chat - a feature of the lower slopes - died. This purgatory
continued, almost without pause, for roughly the time it takes to fly the
Atlantic.
Such a trial permits only the lowest form of thought. An auctioneer from
Dijon furnished and refurnished his extensive chateau. I murmured
'Stalingrad, twice as bad,' like a mantra, remembering between throwing up
what fun this really was.
The reward came at dawn. The lip of the crater became visible not far above
us. The huge scale of what we had climbed stretched beneath us, down to the
violet mass of Africa. The sun rose behind the science-fiction peak of
Mawenzi, Kilimanjaro's little sister. By 8am our troupe had reached the rim
of the volcano at 19,000ft.
We could gaze into the snow-filled crater, and at the surreal glaciers that
surround it. This was Stella Point - but not the top. Light-headed with
pride, altitude and lack of sleep, we all elected to climb for another hour,
trudging around the rim of the crater to the summit, Uhuru Peak, at 19,385ft
the highest point in Africa.
Of the 50 other climbers who had been attempting the separate 'tourist'
route up the mountain that night, just two stumbled with us to this true
summit. Our heartiness verged on the lunatic. Two of the party collapsed on
the return march around the crater.
But then, to our great relief, it became clear why Kilimanjaro had to be
climbed at night. The equatorial sun, grilling down on us with pure
ultra-violet, had melted the top of the mountain into a great, barely
climbable mound of white slush and black volcanic sand.
The three guides seized the weakest members of our party, and ran them down
this great, soft scree like marionettes. The rest of us staggered down in
pursuit, losing 4,000 hard-won feet in just over an hour. We reached the
highest tourist refuge, Kibo Huts, at lunchtime and collapsed on to grubby
bunks for a brief doze. But our guide was relentless. The descent had to
continue for another 10 shattering miles before we reached our camp.
After 18 hours on the march, we were barely coherent. Yet we had 'done'
Kilimanjaro. This epic day was the high-point of a deluxe assault. We had
avoided the normal, much-trodden Marangu route up the mountain and had taken
the more beautiful Machame trail. This required tents and 30 porters. The
approach march was reminiscent of Nepal.
But Kilimanjaro's succession of climates - from banana groves, through
rain-forest, through a moss-zone that would delight any Japanese
temple-gardener, through Afghanistan into Antarctica - was more striking and
rapid than in the Himalaya. This is because Kilimanjaro shoots abruptly up
out of a 3,000ft plain.
Though by no means the highest, it is one of the tallest free-standing
mountains in the world. It makes its own, relatively benign, weather; and
its own flora, including peculiar Senescant trees, which populate the upper
slopes like groups of green-haired muppets.
The experience was not cheap. Our well-organised 10-day tour cost Pounds
1,000 per person, including two days recovering in Tanzania's game-parks.
Tips to the guides and porters, plus entry fees, cost another Pounds 200.
The flight cost Pounds 500. And town-dwellers like us had to spend at least
Pounds 200 each buying cold-weather clothes, sleeping bags and so forth. The
only mountaineering equipment needed was Diamox, a pill that stops altitude
sickness.
Nicholas Colchester is editorial director of The Economist Intelligence
Unit.
Eric Christin, Nature Discovery, PO Box 10574, Arusha, Tanzania, fax:
255-57-8406.
