
The troubles for Mr Rupert Murdoch's Star TV network deepened yesterday when
Wharf Cable announced the start of legal proceedings to free it from an
obligation to air Star TV's channels in Hong Kong.
The Hong Kong-based cable-TV station said it regretted that seven months of
negotiations had failed to produce an agreement with Star.
The company's statement is more bad news for Star, which earlier this month
suffered a setback in Taiwan, its most profitable market, when its
advertising distributor severed its relationship with the broadcaster.
Mr Murdoch is expected in Hong Kong next month to oversee personally a
reorganisation of the company, for which his News Corporation paid USDollars
525m last July for a 63 per cent interest.
Wharf Cable launched an eight-channel service at the end of October, five
months after it had been awarded an exclusive licence by the Hong Kong
government. It plans to invest HKDollars 5bn (USDollars 648m) in a cable
system capable of delivering 20 channels.
In June last year it began talks with Star about carrying seven Star TV
satellite-based channels. It is unclear why the two companies have not been
able to agree terms, although industry executives suggest that differences
in business style may partly explain the impasse.
Wharf said it intended to source alternative channels to bring the full
programming line up to 20 channels. The loss of seven channels represented a
substantial opportunity cost to the company, it said.
Raymond Snoddy adds: An independent survey in 13 countries out of the 53
covered by the Star TV satellite footprint shows that the five-channel
service in now seen in 42m homes.
The survey, conducted in September and November by Frank Small and
Associates, shows that the number of homes receiving Star channels has
nearly tripled since the last survey in January 1993.
In China, where the research was conducted in association with the Chinese
authorities, an estimated 30m homes can receive Star. This represents 22 per
cent of all television homes in the areas surveyed.
In India Star penetration has more than doubled to 7m.
Meanwhile, News Corporation has rejected reports by analysts that Star could
lose between USDollars 60m and USDollars 80m.
