
British Rail and London Underground yesterday announced fare increases of up
to 5 per cent - double the rate of inflation - for millions of travellers in
the new year.
Passenger groups and opposition politicians condemned the rises.
On some BR routes where there is tough competition from cars, coaches and
the airlines there will be no fare increases. But on those where fares will
rise increases will be between 2 per cent and 5 per cent. Most BR fare
increases will take effect from January 8.
London Transport, which will raise fares from February 5, said Underground
fares would rise by an average 5 per cent although most bus fares would
remain unchanged. The price of Travelcards, which allow travellers to switch
between trains, the Underground and buses, will increase by up to 9 per
cent.
The Central Rail Users' Consultative Committee, a national watchdog
representing rail passengers, said the overall level of increases was too
high and would deter passengers from trains.
Mr Michael Meacher, Labour transport spokesman, blamed the cost of rail
privatisation for diverting funds from improving the railways.
BR said the 25 regional train operating companies which played an important
role in setting fare levels had to raise more money to finance investments,
but they could not ignore competitive pressures.
The signal workers' strike last summer cost BR Pounds 200m. Before it
numbers of commuters and leisure travellers using the railway had started to
increase.
The new fares include:
Unchanged: InterCity West Coast's long-distance and sleeper fares, Great
Western's leisure fares and Scotrail's Strathclyde services.
No average fare increase: Train operating companies Anglia Railways,
InterCity Cross Country, InterCity East Coast, Merseyrail Electrics and
Regional Railways North East. Three per cent increase: Cardiff Valleys and
InterCity West Coast. Also Sussex Coast lines, North London, South Eastern's
suburban and Kent Coast lines and Solent & Wessex.
Five per cent increase: Chiltern Lines, Great Eastern, London Tilbury and
Southend, Thames Trains and Thameslink.
