
A yawning gap has opened up between what is actually happening to German
broad money and what ought to be happening. A similar gulf has appeared
between how the Bundesbank is supposed to respond and how it is actually
responding. When, on Thursday, it puts forward its revision to this year's
target it needs a good story. If it fails to provide one, its credibility
may be damaged.
Fortunately, by June the annualised rate of M3 growth above the average of
the fourth quarter of 1993 was only 11.3 per cent, down from 15.4 per cent
two months before. Even so, growth was almost double the 4-6 per cent target
range for 1994. If the target is to be met, there must be no further
monetary growth this year, which seems highly unlikely, even though M3 has
been stagnant since April.
Missing monetary targets has become a habit. Goldman Sachs forecasts that M3
will end up having increased at an annual rate of nearly 9 per cent between
1991 and 1994. Since an inflation-neutral rate would be some 5 1/2 per cent,
it also argues that this augurs a renewed rise in inflation.
Even though monetary growth has been bounding ahead, the Bundesbank has
continued to cut interest rates. Since the autumn of 1992, the repurchase
(or 'repo') rate has been cut from 8.9 per cent to 4.91 per cent, with a
reduction of 1.09 percentage points this year. The policy has been one of
modest, but frequent, rate reductions, as inflation has continued its
downward path, from almost 5 per cent in early 1992, to 3 per cent in the
year to June 1994.
Asset growth
How has the supposedly monetarist Bundesbank justified what it has been
doing? Its principal appeal on the overshooting has been to temporary
factors, the most important of which was the unwillingness of depositors to
hold illiquid bank deposits (not included in M3) rather than liquid ones.
Lower short-term rates will, it argues, encourage investors to shift towards
longer term deposits.
This argument is valid, but only up to a point. Total monetary assets, which
include illiquid deposits, have been growing at around 8 1/2 per cent
year-on-year. More serious still, lending to domestic non-banks grew by 10
per cent in the year to April 1994, while that to the public sector rose 13
per cent. The benefits of lower interest rates on the composition of
deposits could be more than offset by accelerated expansion of the total, as
lending takes off.
The Bundesbank has six options, argues Merrill Lynch: to leave the target
unchanged, but explain the overshoot away; to increase the target; to
abandon M3 for another aggregate; to abandon monetary targeting; to extend
the current target range until end-1995; or to announce that the growth
rates for next year will be based not on the outcome, but on the upper bound
to this year's target.
Attractive alternative
The first is the most likely, but perhaps the least satisfactory, since it
would render policy utterly obscure. Raising the target substantially would
be almost equivalent to abandoning it. Meanwhile, the most attractive
alternative definition of money, in terms of its recent performance, would
be one that included illiquid deposits. The question, however, is whether
these are relevant components of liquidity. As to abandoning targeting, this
is what has happened almost everywhere else. But such abandonment could be
justified only if the Bundesbank were certain M3 does not mean what it has
long claimed it does. The evidence so far would not support that
proposition.
For the moment, therefore, the ideal mixture of pragmatism with rigour is to
be found in the last two options. Either way, any excess liquidity this year
would have to be mopped up in 1995.
The Bundesbank was right to put M3 to one side while the economy was in deep
recession and inflation was falling. But it should try to keep the growth of
M3 in line with historical experience of the demand for money, at least
until that policy has become demonstrably wrong. The worst of all options
would be to insist on a target whose overshooting is ignored. The Bundesbank
is a far more pragmatic institution than its critics admit. But it should
not be as pragmatic as that.
