
The US government will close on Wednesday for a 'national day of mourning'
for former President Richard Nixon.
Mr Nixon will be buried on Wednesday afternoon in Yorba Linda, California,
his birthplace and the site of the Nixon memorial library.
President Bill Clinton who will attend the funeral - along with former
presidents Gerald Ford, Jimmy Carter, Ronald Reagan and George Bush - plans
to deliver a eulogy. The Reverend Billy Graham, the evangelical preacher who
was a close friend and adviser to Mr Nixon, will preside over the ceremony.
As flags lowered to half-mast across the US, Mr Nixon's compatriots wrestled
uncomfortably with memories of a man who had inspired not only respect for
his political skills and foreign policy achievements, but also loathing for
his manipulation of anti-communist fears and for the abuse of executive
power that led to his resignation from the presidency in 1974.
'He suffered defeats that would have ended most political careers, yet he
won stunning victories that many of the world's most popular leaders have
failed to attain,' Mr Clinton said in an official proclamation on Mr Nixon's
death.
Mr Clinton thanked Mr Nixon 'for his wise counsel on so many occasions on
many issues,' and described his recent books as presenting 'a cogent picture
of emerging global politics that will serve as a guide for policy makers for
years to come'.
But Mr Nixon's literary testament, to be published next month under the
title Beyond Peace, is highly critical of Mr Clinton's administration in
both in foreign policy and in domestic affairs.
Excerpts from the book published in Time magazine describe the US
involvement in Somalia as 'a lesson in how not to conduct foreign policy'.
'What began as a highly popular humanitarian relief program under President
Bush became a highly controversial UN nation building project under
President Clinton,' Mr Nixon wrote.
Mr Nixon also denigrated his successor's healthcare reform plan. If enacted,
he wrote, it would be 'less a prescription for better healthcare than a
blueprint for the takeover by the federal government of one seventh of the
nation's economy'.
Funeral arrangements for the former president are a much less controversial
matter today than they were in 1974, when Mr Nixon fell ill shortly after
resigning his office. Congressional leaders at the time feared an unseemly
row over the extent to which state honours should be accorded to the
disgraced politician.
Twenty years on, the Congressional leadership had already begun to make
arrangements for a lying in state under the Capitol dome, but Mr Nixon's own
wish for a more private ceremony in Yorba Linda prevailed.
