
Lo, the Star, which they had seen in the east, went before them, till it
came and stood over where the young child was. - St. Matthew, chapter 2, verse 9.
Comet? Supernova? Conjunction of planets? Myth? Or miracle?
Those, broadly speaking, are the five favourite explanations for the Star of
Bethlehem - an apparition whose identity has attracted much speculation from
astronomers, amateur and professional, over the years.
Of course the atheist who regards the Bible as superstitious nonsense can
dismiss the Star as a figment of the imagination of whoever wrote Matthew's
gospel. At the other extreme, the fundamentalist who regards the Bible as
literal truth can claim the Star simply as a miracle; if so, there is no
point in trying to relate a divine sign to known astronomical events.
However, there are many Christians who would be prepared to believe that God
made use of natural events to give a sign of his Son's coming. And there are
many non-Christians who accept that there could be historical - though not
supernatural - explanations for some stories in the Bible.
So, what natural phenomena could account for the Star of Bethlehem? Anyone
who has seen the planet Venus shining bright in the western sky on a crisp
winter evening may feel that no further explanation is needed.
But Venus could not really be the answer. Nor could any other regular
feature of our night sky.
Surely only a really remarkable portent would have drawn the wise men or
Magi several hundred miles west to Palestine from their presumed homes in
Persia.
If we are looking for a special astronomical event, we need to know its date
as accurately as possible. Our current system of numbering years, supposedly
starting from Christ's birth, was not fixed until the 6th century AD, when
the historical record was far from clear.
Modern Bible scholars believe that the date of the nativity was somewhere
between 8 BC when the Emperor Augustus ordered his great tax census and 4 BC
when King Herod died. They have no clues about the time of year. Three or
four centuries later, people began to celebrate Christmas just after the
winter solstice, to take advantage of existing pagan festivals.
Although no reliable astronomical chronicles survive from the Roman Empire,
we do have such records from ancient China. They provide no clear evidence
that a brilliant new star appeared in the sky between 8 and 4 BC. This seems
to rule out the most obvious explanation for the Star of Bethlehem - a
supernova or gigantic cosmic explosion elsewhere in our galaxy.
However, Chinese observers did describe a bright comet which appeared in the
spring of 5 BC and remained visible well into the summer. A comet with a
vertical tail might fit Matthew's description of a Star that 'stood over'
Bethlehem.
Although some historians have rejected this theory on the grounds that a
comet was usually regarded as an ill omen, others maintain that a comet
could equally well portend good news in the ancient world.
A different line of argument moves away from the Christmas card image of the
Star as something spectacularly bright and beautiful. After all, St. Matthew
tells us that Herod, his chief priests and scribes failed to notice it until
the wise men appeared in Jerusalem.
Perhaps the Magi saw a more subtle astrological sign. This would not have
been obvious to the contemporary Jewish court, which paid little attention
to astrology, but could have been a powerful portent for the wise men, who
were probably Zoroastrian priests from Persia.
The most likely event of this sort occurred in 7 BC - a 'triple conjunction'
of the planets Jupiter and Saturn in the constellation Pisces. The planets
appeared close together in the sky on three occasions during the year, most
dramatically on September 15 when they rose simultaneously above the horizon
at sunset.
David Hughes, an astronomer at Sheffield University, believes that the wise
men took this as the moment of Christ's birth. Jupiter was king of the gods,
Saturn represented justice and Pisces was the sign of the Jews, giving the
event an astrological potency that is hard to imagine today.
Whatever happened, the Star is a romantic addition to the Christmas story,
not an essential part of its message. But for some astronomers it is the
most fascinating mystery in the Bible - all the better because there is
little prospect of anyone ever coming up with a definitive solution.
