
A senior US diplomat arrived in Pyongyang yesterday to seek the release of a
US army pilot whose detention by North Korea threatens its recent nuclear
agreement with Washington.
The visit by Mr Thomas Hubbard, a deputy assistant secretary of state,
follows that of a US congressman who last week helped to arrange the return
of the body of the pilot's colleague, killed in the crash of their
helicopter in North Korea.
North Korea has said that it has delayed the repatriation of the captured
pilot, Chief Warrant Officer Bobby Hall, because he has not co-operated in
its investigation of the straying of the OH-58 reconnaissance helicopter
into its airspace.
Pyongyang claims the helicopter was on a spying mission and the North has
demanded an acknowledgement of guilt and an apology from the US. Last night
North Korea said the pilot had confessed to intruding deep into its
territory on a reconnaissance mission and had asked for forgiveness. The
official news agency quoted Hall as saying: 'I admit that this criminal
action is inexcusable and unpardonable. However, at home my parents, wife
and kids are anxiously waiting for my return.'
Washington said the helicopter flew into North Korea because of a
navigational error.
Analysts believe other reasons may account for North Korea's reluctance to
release the pilot. One possibility is that North Korea is trying to exploit
the incident to gain new concessions from the US. Pyongyang has been
pressing Washington to sign a peace treaty that would formally end the
Korean war of 1950-53, in the hope that this would eventually lead to the
withdrawal of the 37,000 US troops in South Korea.
North Korea could argue that the helicopter incident underscores the need
for such a peace treaty.
It may also try to use the incident as a means to force the US to accelerate
the establishment of diplomatic ties with Pyongyang, as promised under the
bilateral nuclear accord concluded in October.
The US also agreed to guarantee international aid, including the supply of
safer light-water reactors, if North Korea dismantled its current nuclear
programme, which is suspected of producing weapons-grade plutonium.
However, such a diplomatic strategy carries risks for North Korea since US
congressional critics of the nuclear agreement may use the continued
detention of the pilot as a reason to block the deal.
US critics of the accord believe that it offers too many concessions to
North Korea. Senator Bob Dole, who is soon to become US Senate majority
leader, was quoted yesterday as calling the agreement 'a lousy deal' and
adding, 'you can't trust the North Koreans'.
Mr Lee Hamilton, outgoing chairman of the US House of Representatives
foreign relations committee, said: 'I don't think we'd proceed with our side
of the nuclear accord if they don't release the airman.'
Even so, the delay may also reflect deep divisions between North Korea
leaders over the nuclear agreement. Some South Korean officials believe that
the Northern military is at odds with its government over whether to proceed
with the agreement.
