
North Korea has already developed five nuclear bombs and plans to build
more, a senior North Korean defector claimed yesterday.
But the US later disputed this, suggesting the figure was too high.
The defector, Mr Kang Myong-do, a son-in-law of the North Korean prime
minister, said the North's nuclear policy was to make about 10 nuclear bombs
before revealing their existence.
He said the nuclear weapons programme was meant to protect the North against
the US and South Korea.
'By possessing nuclear weapons, North Korea thinks it can be relieved from
security worries and will be able to divert resources from the arms industry
to agriculture and light industry,' he said. This could help rescue the
North's shrinking economy.
Mr Kang arrived in Seoul from China in May but his defection was not
disclosed until yesterday. He appeared at a news conference with Mr Cho
Myong-chol, the son of a former construction minister, who defected last
week.
They are the two most senior North Korean officials to have fled to South
Korea.
Their press conference appears to be part of a renewed propaganda war
between Seoul and Pyongyang following the death of North Korea's President
Kim's Il-sung. It was evidently meant to embarrass the North as it
celebrated Victory Day, marking the end of the Korean war in 1953.
North Korea, which routinely claims defectors have been kidnapped by Seoul,
is likely to react strongly. Increased tension between the two Koreas are
reducing chances of a summit between their leaders after it was postponed on
Mr Kim's death.
Some analysts - and US officials - are sceptical of Mr Kang's claims,
doubting the North's technical capability to assemble nuclear devices as
well as the number of bombs claimed by Kang.
Mr William Perry, US defence secretary, said he stood behind a US
intelligence estimate that North Korea probably had reprocessed enough
plutonium to build one or two nuclear bombs.
US State Department spokesman Mike McCurry conceded there was debate within
intelligence ranks about the 'exact parameters' of the North Korean nuclear
programme. 'But the information provided by this defector falls well beyond
and well outside of those parameters,' he said.
Mr Kang's claim that the North has developed five nuclear bombs was based on
a discussion he had with a senior security official at the Yongbyon nuclear
complex.
The two defectors voiced opposition to Mr Kim Jong-il's assumption of power
after the death of his father, President Kim Il-sung. They said Mr Kim was
in firm control, having exercised extensive administrative powers since
1985. But food shortages and other economic problems threatened his rule,
while the military was divided in its loyalty to him.
Mr Kang said Mr Kim was 'trying his utmost' to postpone international
nuclear inspections until the North made as many nuclear warheads as it
needed. The North saw them as a card in negotiations with the US about
diplomatic recognition and economic aid.
Analysts are interested in the effect of Mr Kang's defection on the future
of Prime Minister Kang Song-san, third-ranking official in the North.
