
Mrs Gillian Shephard, the agriculture secretary, and Mr John Gummer,
environment secretary, are setting up a company to create the National
Forest, a wooded landscape over 194 sq miles of the Midlands.
The National Forest is designed to rehabilitate a landscape spoiled by
mining, to provide new rural business opportunities and to create
recreational facilities.
The company will have its spending controlled by the government with a
corporate plan approved by ministers each year. The quango's operations will
start formally on April 1 next year.
Mr Gummer said in a Commons written answer: 'A new independent body will be
able to co-ordinate and promote new partnerships and act as a catalyst for
local and national initiatives in the Forest area.'
Creation of the forest will need the participation of the Forestry
Commission, local authorities, landowners and the Countryside Commission,
which has sponsored the forest since conceiving it in 1987.
Mr Gummer said there would be public funding 'to provide financial support
for the company's administration and special project initiatives'. But he
did not specify the amount and this is unlikely to be clear until the
government has completed its review of forestry incentives.
Ms Susan Bell, leader of the Countryside Commission team which has done the
preliminary work on establishing the National Forest, estimated that
spending of Pounds 50m would be needed over the next 10 years.
Mr Gummer said that establishment of the new company 'marks a milestone
towards achieving our manifesto commitment to develop the National Forest'.
It takes the project out of the control of the Countryside Commission.
Ms Bell noted that the forest 'is so heavily dependent on government money
that the government wanted to maintain control over that money'.
The forest is expected to find funds from English Partnerships, the
government regeneration agency, the European Union, forestry grants to
landowners and the Countryside Commission, which has earmarked Pounds 2m a
year.
The National Forest straddles parts of Derbyshire, Leicestershire and
Staffordshire, surrounding the towns of Burton-upon-Trent, Swadlincote,
Ashby de la Zouch and Coalville.
