
Use of the Internet, an global network of computer networks, is expanding
rapidly as individual personal computer users and companies recognise its
value for communications, research and marketing.
The Internet is the most expansive network of computer networks in the
world, linking an estimated 2.2m computers and over 25m users in 137
countries. Use of the Internet is growing at a rate of about ten per cent
per month.
'The Net,' as it is commonly called, is an outgrowth of a US government
funded research program that began in the late 1960s to electronically link
researchers at US universities and government laboratories. Throughout the
1980s, the Internet grew in popularity among computer hobbyists - it
provides cheap electronic mail, conferencing and network searching
capabilities for personal computer junkies. 'Virtual communities' with
common interests are linked on the Internet, exchanging messages from all
over the world.
One of the Internet's attractions is that it allows users to explore
computer data bases all over the world. It is possible, for example, to pour
through the catalogue of the Library of Congress, access information about
NASA space shots, or log on to computers in Australia  - all for the cost of
a local phone call, plus whatever connect charges are imposed by the 'access
provider.'
The growing popularity of the Internet has spawned dozens of these 'access
providers'; companies and organisations that provide individual and
corporate computer users with 'dial up' links to the Internet.
Some, such as the Web in Northern California, encourage social interaction
on-line and off, among their users. This gives them a distinct 'net culture'
reflecting the views and interests of their subscribers. Others act simply
as a connection service, much like a phone company provides links to its
voice network.
Until very recently, however, use of the Internet has been limited to those
with a relatively high level of computer expertise. Most computers on the
Internet run the UNIX operating system, which is unfamiliar to the majority
of PC users. The Internet therefore lacked the 'user friendly' features such
as graphical user interfaces that have made PCs increasingly easy to use.
Now several interface programs are making the 'Net' more accessible to
computer novices. In particular, a program called Mosaic, developed by the
National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) at the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, is gaining popularity as an easy to use point
and click interface for searching portions of the Internet.
Millions of new Internet users are also beginning to gain access to the
worldwide network via commercial on-line information services such as
Compuserve and America Online.
Business use of the Internet is also on the rise , with thousands of
companies hooking their internal networks on to 'the Net.' In the US, the
number of business 'host' computers directly linked to the Internet
increased 63 per cent to 567,686 over the 12 months ending in January,
almost equaling the number of Internet links to US colleges and
universities. Each 'host' computer can support numerous individual personal
computer users.
Use of the Internet in the UK jumped 94 per cent over the same period, with
113,930 host computers hooked up by the end of January. Much of the UK
growth is also believed to come from the commercial sector. Companies are
rushing to take advantage of the Internet as a low-cost route for
international electronic mail. Digital Equipment, the US computer company,
is one of the heaviest users of the Internet, with over 31,000 computers
linked to the system. The company exchanges an average of 1.7m e-mail
messages with people outside the company per month.
The open nature of the Internet with its millions of users and the lack of
any central control has , however, created security problems. Corporate
users of the Internet therefore typically try to isolate their internal
computer networks from the Internet to avoid intrusions from curious or
malevolent computer 'hackers.'
'Security has become a barrier to the commercial growth of the Internet.
Many clients want to connect, but won't do it because of the security
problems,' says Jim Hogan, vice president of global communication and
information processing services at Digital Equipment. The company has 'at
least one or two (computer) break-in attempts per week,' he acknowledges.
'Over the past ten years, we've developed methods of securing our own
network that, as far as we know, have never been penetrated.'
Digital recently announced an Internet security service based on the
technology and expertise that it has developed to protect its own networks.
Digital's system incorporates two 'gateways,' one that is linked to the
Internet and a second that is hidden from the outside world. In effect, the
system builds 'firewalls' around internal networks, protecting them from
unwanted intruders. Encryption and user authentication systems could bring
greater security to the Internet, experts say. However, the introduction of
such systems is not welcomed by many Internet enthusiasts who fear that they
will detract from the open communications that have long been a central
facet of 'net culture.'
O'Reilly and Associates, a US publishing group, has created the Global
Network Navigator, a free Internet-based information center that includes
news, an online magazine, an interactive catalogue and a global marketplace
containing advertiser-sponsored information on a wide range of products and
services.
In California's Silicon Valley, a consortium of companies and organisations
is establishing CommerceNet, an electronic marketplace for high technology
companies.
Mecklermedia , a US technology publishing group, recently launched
'MecklerWeb,' an electronic communications and marketing system aimed at
companies that want to have a 'corporate presence' on the Internet.
Such business uses of the Internet will secure its future as a critical part
of the 'information superhighway,' drawing resources to the development of
new software for use on the Internet and encouraging its expansion.
The Internet of the future is , however, likely to be very different from
the research oriented network that its creators originally envisaged, and
from the computer hobbyists' playground that the Internet has been for the
past decade.
