
A North Korean official warned yesterday that if his country was to develop
nuclear weapons, they would be primarily aimed at Japan, rather than at
South Korea or the US.
The warning, one of the most explicit made by North Korea about the intent
of its possible nuclear weapons programme, is likely to heighten concern in
Tokyo that Pyongyang poses a serious military challenge. However, North
Korean officials claim they suspect Japan's nuclear motives, and the
statement yesterday came a day after the start-up of Japan's first
fast-breeder nuclear reactor, which began a self-sustaining chain reaction.
Mr Cha Bong-ju, the North Korean ambassador to India, again said his country
did not intend to develop nuclear weapons, but told the South Korean news
agency Yonhap the North feared that Japan would eventually become a nuclear
power.
'Our nuclear arms, if developed, would be primarily designed to contain
Japan,' Mr Cha said.
He added that a North Korean nuclear weapon would never be used against
South Korea or the US.
The statements could increase pressure on the Japanese government to take a
tougher line against North Korea over the issue of nuclear site inspections.
They will also provide support for Japanese officials arguing that the
country must boost its defence capability.
North Korea has already developed a missile, the Rodong-I, that can reach
most of Japan, although military analysts believe that Pyongyang does not
yet have the capability of building a sophisticated nuclear warhead small
enough to fit on the missile.
But the ambassador's comments appear to confirm some analysts' fears that
North Korea might use the Japanese fast-breeder reactor, which generates
plutonium, as a pretext for proceeding with its own production of plutonium,
used in the making of nuclear weapons.
It was the second North Korean warning this week that it might be ready to
resume plutonium production.
Some analysts in Seoul believe Mr Cha's comments might be an attempt to
allay South Korea's fears about the development of a North Korean nuclear
weapon by appealing to the traditional Korean dislike of Japan.
North Korea has come under growing pressure to open up its nuclear
facilities to full international nuclear inspections to dispel suspicions
that it is developing nuclear weapons.
Pyongyang rejected a request by the UN Security Council last week that it
accept new inspections of nuclear sites by the International Atomic Energy
Agency.
