
South Korean President Kim Young-sam yesterday announced a gradual easing of
restrictions on economic ties with North Korea following the recent
settlement of the dispute over Pyongyang's nuclear programme.
Seoul is expected to announce tomorrow that South Korean businessmen may
visit North Korea to discuss proposed investment projects and establish
representative offices in the North.
Direct investments of less than Dollars 5m (Pounds 3.1m) will be permitted,
and machinery used in reprocessing commissions from South Korean companies,
such as for textiles, can be shipped to North Korea.
But the measures stop short of allowing the large investments that North
Korea is seeking from South Korea's main industrial groups.
South Korean officials view full-scale economic co-operation as a carrot to
persuade a reluctant North Korea to resume talks with South Korea on such
issues as intra-Korean nuclear inspections.
The partial lifting of the restrictions essentially returns the North-South
economic relationship to the situation two years ago before co-operation was
suspended as a result of North Korea's threat to withdraw from international
nuclear safeguards.
South Korea's main economic organisations, which have been lobbying for the
easing of restrictions, welcomed the announcement.
Mr Kim said a key test of North Korea's willingness to co-operate would be
its acceptance of South Korean nuclear reactors stipulated under the recent
nuclear accord between Washington and Pyongyang. He also expressed support
for North Korea's participation in the Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation
forum.
North Korea meanwhile said yesterday it would hold meetings with the US in
the next few weeks to implement the recent agreement to dismantle its
nuclear programme.
Talks on the disposal of the North's spent fuel rods, capable of producing
five nuclear bombs, will be held in Pyongyang from November 12 to 19.
Consultations on the supply of light water reactors to North Korea to
replace its graphite reactors, which can produce large amounts of
weapons-grade plutonium, will be conducted in Beijing from November 30,
while discussions on the opening of a liaison office between the US and
North Korea will be held in Washington from December 6 to 10.
