
The label Mahlerian is often used too loosely, yet it seems appropriate for
Tuesday's Prom conducted by Simon Rattle.
Besides the Adagio from Mahler's Tenth Symphony, the programme included
Berg's early Altenberg Lieder and Shostakovich's Fourth Symphony, a work
over which the Austrian symphonist's spectre looms large.
Rattle and 'his' City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra have a reputation in
Mahler's last work. Here Rattle conducted - from memory - the opening
movement with a liquid, flowing baton, shaping the CBSO's smooth strings in
passionate arches of melody. He built up the sonorous, organ-like climax
massively, and maintained the intensity in the music's dying phrases.
Much in the five Altenberg Lieder reveals Berg's musical roots in Mahler -
but not the startling orchestral opening, in which complex ostinatos conjure
up the snowstorm of the first poem. Rattle conducted with incisive clarity,
revelling in the colourful sonorities but occasionally smothering the
soprano soloist, Heather Harper.
Miss Harper - who has come out of retirement to sing in two Proms this year -showed her affinity with the music: she made each of Berg's concentrated
phrases (the score is a model of economy) tell, and found lyricism in the
searching lines.
Shostakovich's baffling Fourth Symphony is seldom played. In an act of
self-censorship, the composer suppressed it for 25 years; had it been
premiered in 1936 as scheduled, its revisiting of Mahler's emotional world
would almost certainly have brought down Stalin's wrath on Shostakovich
(significantly, one of the composers approached to complete Mahler's Tenth,
though he declined).
Another suggestion of Mahler was in the sheer size of Shostakovich's
orchestra, and here the CBSO flexed its collective muscle with shattering
results. From the thrusting opening chords, this was high-voltage Rattle,
but he rather overplayed the work's quirkiness that can obscure the anguish
bottled up inside.
Above all, this was a performance that brought home the horror that the
still-idealistic Shostakovich was glimpsing.
