
The Internet, a global 'network of computer networks' linking an estimated
30m computer users, and the forerunner to the much ballyhooed 'information
highway' is creating both opportunities and challenges for traditional
publishers.
Unlike commercial 'on line' information services such as Compuserve, Prodigy
and America On Line, that charge users either according to the amount of
time spent accessing the service or the number of documents read, the
Internet is largely unmonitored.
Any 'information' - be it the text of a novel, the price of stocks or
articles from a newspaper or magazine - that is accessible via the Internet
is essentially in the public domain, free to anyone who can figure out how
to find it in the vast unmapped labyrinth of 'Cyberspace'.
Despite the lack of copyright enforcement on the Internet, which potentially
could undermine the value of their traditional paper-based products, leading
publishing houses are showing increasing interest in the Internet as a new
publishing medium.
The potential of this huge new market - one new Internet user is said to be
'logging on' every two minutes - is too much to ignore, despite the
drawbacks. The new wave of Internet users is dominated by corporate users
and by well-heeled consumers, making them a particularly attractive target
for many publishers.
Several business models have emerged as publishers attempt to tap into this
potentially important new market. These range from offering 'teasers' to
on-line readers in the hopes of persuading them to subscribe to magazines
and newsletters, to experiments with electronic distribution of book
manuscripts.
One of the biggest attractions of the Internet is that it is a very low cost
publishing channel. Anybody with a personal computer, a modem and an account
with one of the hundreds of services that offer Internet access can in
theory 'publish' whatever they wish for the cost of a telephone call.
Beyond lowering the cost of 'vanity publishing', however, the Internet
represents an opportunity to add value to the purchase of reference works
and textbooks. Addison-Wesley, for example, is making one of its textbooks
'Parallel Programming for Scientists and Engineers', available on the
Internet. The publisher assumes that students will still want to buy bound
copies of the book, but will appreciate the opportunity to search the text
on-line.
In another Internet publishing experiment, Encyclopedia Britannica is going
on-line to offer electronic distribution of its materials to universities
and some public libraries. Using software that limits access, the publisher
plans to charge libraries according to a formula reflecting the size of
their subscriber base.
The electronic version of the encyclopedia, called Britannica Online, is
being tested at the University of California at San Diego. The on-line
version includes 'hypertext' links that guide users to related topics as
they search through the text; a feature that cannot be matched by the
traditional book version.
For magazines and newsletters aimed at computer buffs, the Internet can be a
valuable distribution channel. The magazine Wired, which has built a
reputation for publishing articles about the Internet, provides Internet
users with copies of back issues and the opportunity to subscribe on-line
via commercial information services such as America On Line.
The Electronic Newsstand, a Washington, DC-based company founded last year,
offers publishers an opportunity to market magazines, books, newsletters and
business information via the Internet for a Dollars 1000 set-up fee and a
share of subscription payments.
Most of the publishers that use this service provide a few articles from
each issue to lure subscribers. In its first 10 months on the Internet, the
Electronic Newsstand attracted over 3m accesses from over 75,000 different
sites, the company says.
The Electronic Newsstand is in the forefront of a growing trend to create
'billboards on the information highway'; electronic spaces on the Internet
in which companies can display their wares.
Another example of this trend is MecklerWeb, a new venture of Meckler Media,
the US publishing group. Launched earlier this year, MecklerWeb aims to
'provide companies with an inexpensive and rapid means of establishing an
Internet presence,' the company says.
One of the most successful commercial Internet publishing projects is the
Global Network Navigator, an Internet 'magazine' founded last October by
O'Reilly & Associates, a US book publisher that specialises in computer
topics.
By last month GNN had attracted over 40,000 registered users and twice as
many unregistered 'visitors' by offering articles about where to find
information resources on the Internet.
GNN is garnering attention from other businesses by establishing
'meta-centres' including a travel centre and a personal finance information
centre that feature a mix of editorial and promotional material.
Yet publishers must tread carefully as they move to exploit the potential of
this self-regulated global village. Founded in the late 1960s as a
government-funded programme to link researchers at US universities and
government laboratories electronically, the Internet was closed to all
business activity until about two years ago and many Internet users remain
resistant to the intrusions of commercial enterprise.
Other drawbacks include persistent security problems as Internet 'crackers'
break through the barriers that companies attempt to build to limit access
to commercially valuable information and the sometimes unreliable
performance of the Internet.
For now, the Internet is being used most effectively to publish information
about products and services that can be delivered through traditional
channels. As metering and billing technologies evolve it could, however,
become a significant medium for publishing and selling all kinds of
'information'.
In the meantime, the Internet can provide companies with a low cost
opportunity to reach markets that are beyond their geographic reach as well
as valuable experience in the emerging market for electronic publishing.
