
Star Trek has a lot to answer for. The popular science fiction television
and film series, first shown in 1966, set high expectations for computers
that could be controlled by talking to them - and having them talk back.
Although it has taken a quarter of a century, science fiction is now rapidly
becoming reality. Within two years, most personal computers will come with
speakers, a microphone, built-in sound processing, CD-Rom players and
operating system-level sound software.
Until recently, however, there have been few business applications available
to take advantage of these sonic PC appendages. Two promising areas that are
emerging are 'command and control' and voice annotation. Both offer improved
efficiency over keyboards and computer mice and could help to make PCs much
easier to use.
Voice 'command and control' enables PC users to speak commands to the
computer rather than typing them. The advantages are clear, but the drawback
of this technology is that it requires the user to spend a long time
training the PC sound system to recognise his or her voice.
Even when the system has been trained, it can often be disrupted by
background noise. If someone is using the photocopier, the fax machine is
beeping or the air-conditioning has just been switched on, the PC may get
confused.
This problem can be minimised by wearing a telephone operator-style headset
that includes headphones to listen to the sound system and a wrap- around
unidirectional microphone that sits only inches from your lips.
Recognition under these circumstances is actually quite good. You will,
however, have to get used to the idea of being tethered to your PC. Get up
quickly and you find your headset, microphone - and anything else you may be
wearing from the neck up - being dragged off your face, not to mention the
complications of confusing a telephone headset and the one being used for
voice recognition.
The second big area where voice is expected to make inroads is that of
document voice annotation. This is where users can add voice 'notes' to
computer documents.
The idea is that voice annotation of documents provides a quick and easy way
of making comments about the content of the documents - without the comments
having to become part of the textual or graphic content of the document.
Thus changes can be requested to a document without users having to type out
those changes.
Voice annotation is expected to be particularly useful in situations where a
number of people might be collaborating on preparation of a single document.
By using voice annotation as the document is passed around the workgroup
over an electronic mail system, the project co-ordinator can make all the
changes at once without having to worry about using specialised 'versioning'
software to keep track of them.
Voice annotation could also be useful in making confidential comments about
financial figures in spreadsheets or making comments on marketing
presentations before they are completed. Any situation where, in the past,
you might have dictated a note to be typed up and attached to a document is
a candidate for voice annotation.
If speech-embedding technology continues to use better compression (so that
messages do not take up as much disc space or hog the network) and voice
command systems can further improve on their accuracy of recognition, while
cutting down on the 'training' time of the system, then PC users may soon
have the power of a starship commander.
