
It is rare for a day to pass without mention of the Internet. What is it?
The easiest way to think of the Internet is as an international telephone
system for computers. A system of more than 7,500 individual computer
networks, the Internet connects more than 2m computers and 25m people. Just
as the international telephone system makes possible conversations between
individuals anywhere on the planet, so the Internet makes it possible for
computers to exchange messages and information.
Why has it suddenly sprung to prominence?
This is a consequence of the spread of low-cost, powerful computers. The
Internet grew out of a 1969 US Department of Defence project, Arpanet,
designed to link international research teams. The scientists used the
network to disseminate messages and information, and the US government
sponsored its extension to colleges and universities. Today, the National
Research and Education Network, funded by the National Science Foundation,
is the backbone of the Internet in the US.
Computer hobbyists were the first outside the academic community to discover
the benefits of the Internet. As more companies and individuals gain access
to computers and modems (the equivalent of a telephone handset for a
computer), its popularity has soared. Usage is said to be growing at 10 per
cent a month.
What are these benefits?
There are three: ability to send electronic messages to individuals or
groups; the capacity to send large volumes of data rapidly around the globe
(this is a spin-off from the Internet's role as a tool for scientists); and
access to vast amounts of information held on computer databases (among
other things: the complete scripts of Rowan Atkinson's Black Adder
television programmes).
Without doubt, the chief use of the Internet is as a vehicle for electronic
mail. One US corporation exchanges almost 2m Internet messages with people
outside the company every month.
What are the disadvantages?
Power is one. You need a fast computer with plenty of memory to make the
best use of the Internet. Another is navigating the system. Finding what you
want from the bewildering variety of information on offer can be expensive
and time-consuming. Indices and search tools are becoming available, but
they are in early development. And because the Internet developed in an ad
hoc way, there is no central ownership or authority. Management is in the
hands of the users, or at least those users who feel they can contribute to
the Internet Engineering Planning Group: a little daunting for computing
tyros.
How do I get on to the Internet?
Internet users are often connected through their colleges or companies.
Otherwise, you will need to employ an Internet service provider (ISP), which
will, for a fee, arrange access to the Net. In Britain, examples include
Pipex, Cityscape and Demon Internet Services; in France, Oleane; Germany,
X-Link and Maz; Italy, IT-Net; Sweden, Switnet. In Britain, the BBC has
contracted with Pipex to provide low-cost access as a feature of its
programme The Net.
What will I need to join and what will it cost me?
Basically, a powerful personal computer equipped with a modem. After that,
it depends of the level of service, but typically in Britain it will cost an
individual between Pounds 12.50 and Pounds 50 for the software, together
with a monthly fee of Pounds 10 or Pounds 15. You will also have to pay the
cost of the local telephone call to your service provider while you are
connected to the network. In addition, you may have to pay, at business
rates, for information drawn from commercial databases.
You will be registered as an Internet subscriber with a unique address of
your choosing, so long as it follows the Internet format: name, short
address, type of organisation and country. For example: alan. cane.@ ft. co.
uk.
It sounds a little anarchic. Can businesses use it with confidence?
In the past few years, companies have begun to use the Internet on a wide
scale. Perhaps 60 per cent of the traffic on the Net is now commercial in
origin. It has become the information highway of the 1990s.
What about stories of security failures?
The Internet is self-policing, which means that breaches quickly become
public knowledge. Nevertheless, the network was not built with security as a
priority. The intention was to encourage use rather than keep people out.
The ISPs can build a 'firewall' - a secure computer - between the Internet
and a company's own computer systems to prevent hacking and intrusion, while
individuals can encrypt their messages using facilities in their
word-processing software.
Who, if anybody, is making money out of the Internet?
Companies such as Cisco, Welfleet and Synoptics, which build the switches
and routers to manage the networks, are making good profits. The ISPs and
information-providers are still in the investment phase. The network is,
after all, only three years old as a vehicle for commercial traffic.
And the future?
Peter Dawe of Pipex draws an analogy between a Roman road and a modern
motorway. The Internet will remain the principal medium for computer
inter-connection, even if it changes out of all recognition in the process.
