
An ill-starred issue of gold coins, minted to honour former Emperor
Hirohito, has turned into a meltdown for the Japanese government -
financially as well as literally.
The finance ministry stands to lose about Y270bn (Pounds 1.72bn) on the sale
of 90 tonnes of gold obtained from melting down the coins, which were issued
in 1986 and 1987 to commemorate Hirohito's 60 years on the throne. Leading
traders say the loss is probably the largest any government has suffered
through a gold sale.
The coins have been dogged by controversy and scandal. They were issued with
a face value of Y100,000 each, but contained gold worth only half that.
The government initially seemed to have made a profit of about Y500bn, but
in 1990 Tokyo police claimed that counterfeit Hirohito coins were being
imported into Japan. The report caused so much uncertainty that many
Japanese sold their coins back to the Bank of Japan.
The 'melt value' of each coin has fallen to about Y25,000 because the
Japanese currency has strengthened and the gold price has fallen since they
were issued. As the Bank of Japan has had to redeem all returned coins at
face value, it could lose Y75,000 a coin.
The 90 tonnes of coins mentioned by the finance ministry last week is
equivalent to about 4.5m Hirohito coins, each containing 20 grams of gold,
according to gold dealers.
Mr Paul Davies, a British coin dealer from whom 3,200 allegedly counterfeit
coins were confiscated, repeated at the weekend his belief that the coins in
question were genuine. No charges have been brought against him. He is
pursuing court actions against the Japanese authorities, seeking the return
of the confiscated coins and asking for compensation. He expects the case to
take another two years.
The meltdown could affect sentiment in the gold market. Mr Andy Smith,
analyst at the Union Bank of Switzerland, said: 'The amount of gold is
insignificant and the market will easily absorb it. But the symbolism of
this is immeasurable in that we have the first gold sale from one of the
western world's principal gold hoarding nations.'
