
The Bundesbank yesterday set a tight monetary target for next year and
warned industry, trade unions and the federal and state governments against
following policies that could push up inflation.
Mr Hans Tietmeyer, president of the German central bank, gave no hint of
future interest policy, but some economists said the money-supply goal for
1995 could only be achieved if interest rates rose. 'The Bundesbank will be
forced to act,' said Mr Adolf Rosenstock, Frankfurt-based economist at
Industrial Bank of Japan.
The bank set its target range for M3, the broad monetary aggregate, at
between 4 and 6 per cent. This is unchanged from 1994, but because of the
way the rate is calculated - on an annualised basis from fourth quarter to
fourth quarter - it implies a much lower average growth rate of 3.5 per cent
after this year's 9 per cent.
Thus, said Salomon Brothers, the US investment bank: 'The Bundesbank likely
will have to tighten interest rate policy markedly in the course of the
year.' It said monetary tightening would be appropriate because of expected
higher wage rises, rising import prices and price pressures at the producer
level. Official figures yesterday showed a rise of 0.4 per cent in west
German producer prices in November over October.
The Bundesbank said its monetary policies in 1995 would be aimed at
dampening price growth further and creating monetary conditions for lasting
economic growth. It reaffirmed its commitment to M3 as its main policy
yardstick, despite the extreme growth rates experienced earlier this year.
To encourage funds to move out of short-term deposits (included in M3) into
longer-term investments, the Bundesbank cut interest rates earlier this
year. Sine May, the discount and Lombard rates have been unchanged at 4.5
and 6 per cent respectively.
With an annualised growth rate in M3 of 6 per cent in November, the
Bundesbank's money-supply target is now being met. However, the trend has
been helped by the introduction of money-market funds into Germany. If these
were included in M3, the November rate would have been 6.9 per cent.
The Bundesbank will improve its monitoring of monetary trends by including
these funds into 'expanded M3', which also includes traditional M3 (cash,
short- and medium-term deposits and savings) and deposits in foreign
branches of German banks.
The M3 target range allows for potential economic growth of 2.75 per cent
and inflation of 2 per cent - the Bundesbank's medium-term goal - with 1 per
cent to allow for a slowdown in the velocity of money in circulation. Mr
Tietmeyer said money supply was more than adequate after this year's strong
increase.
He said the bank's anti-inflationary stance needed government support in
reining back spending, and from wage negotiators in reaching moderate
settlements. He warned companies contemplating high price rises that 'the
monetary conditions will not be created for this'. Although the Bundesbank's
inflation goal was 2 per cent, he said he would like to see the rate lower.
See Lex
