
Boarded-up shops, dilapidated buildings and empty streets are evidence of
the mounting pressures facing Britain's town centres. Recession, a greater
reliance on cars, and competition from business parks and out-of-town
shopping centres have undermined the prosperity of many traditional centres
over the past five years.
The problem is widespread and urgent, according to a recent government
report, Vital and Viable Town Centres*. 'Whereas in the 1980s, most British
towns expected their shopping centres to grow, many now feel threatened and
there are widespread signs of decline. Many towns and cities are at a
turning point,' it says.
The need to stop the rot has assumed a new prominence in the government's
environmental policies. John Gummer, environment secretary, has recently
introduced guidelines to help to curb out-of-town development, reduce the
need for lengthy car journeys and improve the vitality of city centres.
The need for 'sustainable development' is at the centre of his concerns. 'We
cannot afford urban sprawl and to place development in locations which can
only be served by long trips by car,' he said last week.
Gummer's guidelines represent a marked change from the laisser faire
policies of the last decade, under which the UK became home to some of the
largest out-of-town shopping centres in Europe. The most striking aspect of
the policy shift is the proposed tightening of the planning rules on future
developments of this kind. According to a guidance note, PPG6, issued last
summer, planning authorities should not promote large out-of-town stores if
they would seriously jeopardise town centres.
This guidance was followed by a draft consultation paper on transport
policies, published earlier this year, which discouraged local authorities
from allowing development unless it was easily serviced by public transport.
Gummer's proposals have been welcomed by the environmental lobby, as well as
by many planners, property owners and retailers. But critics say they have
been insufficiently thought through. They claim that obstructing out-of-town
development is not enough to ensure a vibrant town centre.
Neglect, as well as the threat from out-of-town shopping, pose the most
serious threats to town centres, according to the report. 'Strengthening
planning policies is not enough,' it says.
The point was echoed by the Consumers' Association at a recent select
committee hearing. 'Town centres will survive only if they provide shoppers
with what they want and need,' it said.
Town centres are being told to fight back. The government report says local
authorities should work with local businesses and other key interests to
upgrade town centres by making the town look well-cared for and by improving
short-stay car parking, bus services and security.
But who should pay for such improvements? The report acknowledges that local
businesses are resistant to foot the bill. 'As businesses often believe they
are already paying for local services through the business rate, there is a
need to review the mechanisms for resourcing the improvement and maintenance
of town centres,' it says.
As matters stand, there is little reason to expect more money to be spent on
town centres. A recent report by Hillier Parker into Quality in the Public
Realm found that only 20 per cent of local authorities plan to spend more
than Pounds 1m and 46 per cent planned to spend less than Pounds 500,000 on
town centre improvements over the next three years. 'All recent research
shows that there is risk that the share of total retail spending taken by
town centres will continue to decline,' says Brian Raggett, the report's
author.
Another concern is that a clamp-down on out-of-town development will lead to
increased town centre congestion. This has long been an obstacle to town
centre development. 'What drives developers out of town is the unwillingness
of local authorities to allow development in town,' says William McKee of
the British Property Federation, a landlords' association.
Peter Hall, who was until recently a planning adviser to Gummer, says: 'What
we have to ensure is that (the restoration of city centres) is not achieved
by congestion, which could be less sustainable than allowing development to
go out into the green fields.'
He suggests curbing the growth of towns and cities by establishing new
settlements. 'New communities form part of the package of sustainable
development.'
The pronouncements of the planners and policy formers are viewed with
bemusement by many property developers, who feel that the government's
planning policy lacks consistency. They claim that this wastes time and
money, when they are dealing with projects that take many years to plan and
assemble.
But there is a more fundamental reservation on the part of the development
industry to the government's revised policy. The British Property
Federation, which represents landlords, is concerned that the importance of
economic development may be lost in the clamour for environmental
protection.
'We want to support sustainable development but we think there is a grave
danger that the sustainable development argument will be used to turn down
anything the environmental lobby does not like,' says McKee.
The defenders of a more liberal planning policy argue that the swing to
out-of-town shopping is underpinned by a strong demand from consumers. Many
traditional high street shops are shifting to out-of-town centres, retail
warehouses are now embracing products such as toys, electrical goods and
computers, and discount warehouses, such as Costco at Thurrock in Essex, are
making increasing inroads into the market.
The pressures for more out-of-town and edge-of-town development lead some
commentators to argue that the government should crack down decisively to
prevent further erosion of the countryside and the vitality of cities.
Duncan McLaren of Friends of the Earth, the environmental pressure group,
believes that the time has come for the UK to choose between US-style
development, where almost all shopping is on the ringroads surrounding a
town, or the model of most Continental cities, which generally have central
shopping facilities. 'At the moment we are at a crossroads,' he says.
Others argue that the UK should opt for a combination of out-of-town
development and town centre development in an effort to reduce congestion
and preserve the character of town centres. 'Out-of-town sites and thriving
town centres are not mutually exclusive,' says Stuart Robinson of chartered
surveyors Hillier Parker.
The question of how well an out-of-town development can co-exist with a
healthy town centre depends on the town's circumstances. In big towns, the
demand may be large enough to accommodate both out-of-town superstores and a
healthy retail sector within the town centre; in small towns, the arrival of
a superstore may squeeze out smaller retailers in the town centres.
Many planning experts believe that the government's policies may turn out to
be less radical than they first appear. For all Gummer's rhetoric, the
wording of his department's new guidelines is relatively mild.
'The shift in policy is not one of moving from free development to
restricted development,' says Ross Davies of the Oxford Institute of Retail
Management. 'It is a swing back to a balanced view.'
* Vital and Viable Town Centres, HMSO
