
BAT Industries yesterday announced the departure of Mr John Bishop as
chairman of its Eagle Star Insurance subsidiary, in a management
reorganisation which signals a shift in its approach to the increasingly
competitive general and life insurance markets.
Mr Stephen Melcher, currently chairman of Eagle Star Life, becomes chief
executive of Eagle Star, taking control of both life and general insurance
businesses. Alongside other management changes, the aim is to strengthen the
Eagle Star 'brand', increase control over distribution and raise the profile
of Far East and other international operations.
Mr George Greener, chairman of Eagle Star, said customers were looking for a
powerful brand to meet all their insurance needs, 'so it is logical for us
to respond by restructuring our organisation and appointing a chief
executive'. Mr Melcher would be a 'brand manager' for the whole of Eagle
Star.
Mr Paul Swinburn, director of corporate communications, said: 'We went down
the road of trying to build different companies. There is a sense in which
these companies need some independence, but frankly it had gone too far.
People picked up the ball and ran off the field with it.'
Eagle Star said it aimed to tighten links with the intermediaries - or
retailers - who sell its products, increasing speculation that BAT may take
over a building society. 'The idea that you can abdicate control over
distribution to a third party is fundamentally flawed,' said Mr Swinburn.
It will also give a higher profile to its telephone motor insurance
operation, Eagle Star Direct.
Mr Greener said the restructuring recognised growing similarities between
businesses in the EU, and developments by the company in fast growing
insurance markets in the Far East.
Mr Pierre Chartrand is to become managing director of the Far East life and
general business - in Hong Kong, Singapore, China and Taiwan - reporting
directly to Mr Greener.
Mr Clive Coates, finance director, becomes deputy chairman, and chairman of
the South African subsidiary.
Mr Bishop joined Eagle Star from Sun Alliance about three years ago.
