
The most criticised aspect of President Kim Young-sam's administration has
been its inconsistent policy on the North Korean nuclear issue.
Mr Kim has shifted back and forth between accommodation and tough rhetoric
during his 16 months in office. This reflects deep divisions, largely based
on generational differences, among the South Korean public and his own
cabinet on how to handle North Korea.
But North Korea's apparent final refusal to allow international inspections
of its nuclear facilities has ended the months of wavering in Seoul. The
government now appears united in supporting stiff sanctions against the
north.
This does not mean, however, that public debate on the issue has abated.
There are predictions that South Korea could soon witness some of its
biggest demonstrations since 1987, when the military government was
overthrown, as students protest that the government's hard-line policy could
eventually lead to war.
The nuclear dispute has served as a catalyst on Korea's future role in
north-east Asia and Seoul's relations with the US, its closest ally.
Whatever the outcome of the crisis, South Korea is likely to adopt a more
independent and assertive foreign policy in the future that could weaken its
ties with the US and might even lead to acquiring its own nuclear
capability.
Conservatives have criticised the government for allowing the US to dominate
policy on North Korea at the expense of South Korea's national interests.
They were angered by Washington's willingness to establish direct contacts
and possible diplomatic relations with North Korea, a development they
feared would weaken South Korea and strengthen the north.
As South Korea tried to undermine support for the north by wooing its
Chinese and Russian allies, so North Korea was believed to be doing the same
by using the nuclear inspection issue to gain US diplomatic recognition.
The collapse of Washington's conciliatory approach to North Korea in
response to Pyongyang's continued refusal to make concessions on nuclear
inspections has vindicated the conservative faction and strengthened its
influence.
But there are doubts in the two opposition parties - and among the 84 per
cent of the population born after the Korean war ended in 1953 - that
confrontation with North Korea is desirable.
University students believe that the US and Japan, not North Korea,
represent the biggest potential threats to South Korea, according to a
recent survey. They claim that the nuclear dispute has been provoked by the
US to reverse Washington's dwindling influence on the Korean peninsula.
Anti-American feeling is widespread because of past US support for the
country's military rulers. This view is not limited to students. 'The US
military and CIA are causing this crisis because they need a new enemy to
replace the Soviet Union and thus maintain their huge budgets. That enemy is
North Korea,' says a South Korean businessman.
Public distrust is even greater concerning Japan, Korea's traditional foe.
One sign of widespread suspicion toward Japan is the plot of South Korea's
current best-selling novel, a thriller called The Rose Of Sharon Has
Blossomed, the title referring to Korea's national flower.
It is the late 1990s and Japan has launched a limited military attack
against South Korea as a result of a dispute between the two countries over
raw materials from Russia.
South Korea suddenly reveals that it has been secretly co-operating with
North Korea on a nuclear bomb. The two Koreas explode the device on a
deserted island near Tokyo as a warning and Japan surrenders. Korea has
obtained just revenge for Japan's harsh colonial rule of the Korean
peninsula in the early 20th century.
The popularity of the novel suggests that one unexpected result of the North
Korean nuclear dispute may be growing public acceptance for South Korea to
possess its own nuclear arsenal.
'Many people wonder if South Korea should try to inherit the North Korean
bomb once reunification occurs or try to develop our own since it would
improve our security and status,' said one Korean journalist. 'We would no
longer be the Korean shrimp among the whales of Japan, China and Russia.'
South Korea tried to develop a nuclear bomb in the 1970s under its former
military president, Mr Park Chung hee, to counter the north's military
strength. It was forced to abandon the programme under US pressure.
In contrast, it is the left that is now leading the call for South Korea to
acquire nuclear capability to counter what is perceived to be a potential
Japanese atomic threat.
There is concern in South Korea about Japan's growing stockpile of
plutonium, the key ingredient in manufacturing a nuclear weapon. Japan is
also building a plutonium processing plant and recently began operating an
experimental fast breeder reactor that can produce additional plutonium.
North Korea has tried to exploit the south's fears by suggesting that its
suspected nuclear programme is meant to contain Japan, which it accuses of
racing 'headlong toward nuclear armament'.
Moderate South Korean politicians are also beginning to argue that their
country should acquire the potential capability to enter the nuclear club in
response to possible atomic threats from either North Korea or Japan.
Mr Park Chan-jong, an opposition MP who is one of South Korea's most popular
politicians, recently proposed that the country should acquire enrichment
and reprocessing facilities that could extract plutonium from the nuclear
waste generated by its 20 current and planned commercial reactors.
The reprocessing facilities would enable South Korea to obtain plutonium for
possible nuclear weapons in the event of an national emergency.
Although Mr Park supports strict international inspection procedures for the
South Korean reprocessing facilities, their existence 'would serve as a
check against North Korean tactics.
'We can talk on equal terms with other nations which have similar nuclear
facilities,' he said. 'Though Japan is exemplary in terms of its nuclear
transparency, no one can deny its potential for nuclear weapons capability.'
South Korean nuclear industry officials favour reprocessing facilities on
practical grounds since the country is having difficulty finding sites to
store nuclear waste.
But one obstacle is that the US has barred South Korea from reprocessing
spent nuclear fuel since the 1970s as part of its policy of stopping Seoul
from developing nuclear weapons.
'South Korean nuclear and missile sovereignty should be restored,' says Mr
Park. 'Our sovereign rights over the peaceful use of nuclear energy and
missile development have been unjustifiably suppressed by the US.
Consequently, this nation now has no alternative but to depend on the US for
its security whenever threatened by the North Korean strategic capability.'
The government has strongly condemned any suggestion that it is considering
building nuclear reprocessing facilities, explaining it would increase
tensions in the region. It would also violate the 1991 North-South Korean
denuclearisation treaty, which bans plutonium-separation facilities.
The proposal to acquire reprocessing capabilities is an 'irresponsible idea
being promoted by the opposition,' says one aide to President Kim Young-sam.
But that may not be true much longer if the government decides to nullify
the inter-Korean denuclearisation treaty because of North Korea's
construction of a suspected nuclear reprocessing facility and its refusal to
allow international nuclear inspections.
