
As the British footwear industry fights against the threat of east Asian
imports, one UK company is making a healthy living by supplying shoe
components to Asian manufacturers.
Chamberlain Phipps - which manufactures plastic and rubber soles, as well as
shoes - is hoping to cash in on its success by returning to the market this
summer valued at more than Pounds 90m.
The group was last quoted on the London Stock Exchange in 1989, when it was
acquired by Evode, the adhesives company, as part of a larger purchase.
By 1992, however, the company had begun to suffer the effects of recession
and a sharp downturn in the UK shoe market. Evode opted to sell Chamberlain
to Mr Dan Sullivan, a US investor, and Legal & General Ventures, the venture
capital company, for Pounds 12m.
Since then, the two shareholders have invested a further Pounds 30m in
acquisitions and restructuring. Chamberlain now claims to be a leading
exporter of plastic and rubber shoe components to east Asia, and France's
largest private-label shoe supplier. Profits have risen from just under
Pounds 5m in 1992 to about Pounds 11m this year.
The company aims to raise Pounds 50m in the float, of which Pounds 35m will
be used to reduce debt. The remaining Pounds 15m will be split between the
founding shareholders.
Mr Sullivan, who boasts a track record of more than 30 buy-ins and
flotations in the US, including Tyco Toys, is expected to recoup his Pounds
4m original investment in return for selling about 10 per cent of his 50 per
cent holding.
After the float, which will roughly double Chamberlain's equity base, Mr
Sullivan will hold between 27 and 30 per cent.
Legal & General is selling about half its stake and will retain between 15
and 20 per cent of the enlarged group.
Mr Sullivan said the export market, particularly in east Asia, represented
great potential. 'Demand is high for western European materials,' he said.
They offered quality and choice at a price which could be incorporated into
the cheaper east Asian shoes, because of the relatively low labour cost.
