
When General Electric of the US admitted recently that computer hackers had
gained access to sensitive company material via the Internet, it raised
fears among businesses about the confidentiality of their dealings on the
rapidly-expanding worldwide computer network.
'Many people believe the Internet offers them all the security of a royal
telephone call,' says Gerry O'Neill of Britain's National Computing Centre
in Manchester, speaking ironically.
He estimates that around 60 per cent of all traffic on the Internet is of
commercial origin, based on message exchanges using the . co suffix, which
identifies business users. 'Security practices which are required for an
internal network with a few thousand users simply do not guarantee secure
links to an Internet community of 35m people,' he says.
The responsibility rests with companies to establish their security
properly. But there are indications that some of the 25,000 or so companies
worldwide thought to be using the Internet commercially may not be taking
security as seriously as the risks warrant, or that they do not regard their
data as particularly sensitive.
A survey in the US last month by Ernst & Young and Information Week magazine
quizzed more than 1,250 various-sized companies. More than half admitted
suffering some kind of loss due to computer security problems, but 34 per
cent of respondents said their senior management saw information security as
only somewhat important, and 8 per cent - around 100 companies - said the
issue was viewed as not important at all.
Dr Brian Neale, a UK-based specialist on Internet security with US computer
company Digital Equipment, points out that once a system's security has been
breached, its advantages are lost to legitimate users until the problem is
solved. Even if the loss is only for a few hours, the cost can be high. GE's
system was off the Net for about a week.
'The scramble among businesses not to be left behind by the Internet
revolution has meant that the normally high security standards found among
large IT users are not mirrored in their policies towards the Internet,' Dr
Neale says. He estimates that three-quarters of large firms currently using,
or intending to use, the Internet fall into this category and are
under-protected, making them 'dangerous drivers on the information
superhighway'. In a study called Secure Connections to the Internet, Neale
outlines the need for effective security procedures - known as firewalls. In
effect, these are 'gateway' computers which distinguish authorised access
from unauthorised. 'The aim of the Digital firewall is to allow employees to
gain access to Internet services in as near-transparent fashion as possible,
while preventing access of unauthorised external users,' he says.
Britain's Department of Trade and Industry has a permanent team working on
policy for IT security. With several leading companies, including BT,
Unilever, Midland Bank and Nationwide Building Society, the team has
produced a code of practice advising information security managers how to
establish and develop a secure information strategy.
But a big part of the security problem as it specifically relates to the
Internet is that there is no visible regulator or any overall authority that
formally polices those who use the system.
Fundamental legal requirements are laid down by the 1984 Data Protection
Act, one of the principles of which states that 'appropriate security
measures shall be taken against unauthorised access to or alteration,
disclosure or destruction of personal data and against accidental loss or
destruction of personal data.'
While the 1990 Computer Misuse Act does not impose any statutory
requirements on businesses, its aim is to deter unauthorised access to, and
modification of, information held on computers.
It created three offences: acting with intent to gain unauthorised access to
programs or data held on computer; unauthorised access with intent to commit
or facilitate commission of more serious offences; and unauthorised
modification of the contents of a computer.
The DTI believes companies should promote awareness of these offences as
part of their computer security policies, in addition to taking steps to
reduce the risk of offences being perpetrated on their computer systems.
As became clear from the GE breach, even the existence of sophisticated
firewalls does not deter dedicated hackers. What is obvious, however, is
that as the nature of on-line commerce evolves, companies will be forced to
reassess their computer security provisions almost continually.
Dr Brian Neale, who is author of the report Secure Connections to the
Internet, can be contacted at brian. neale@sbp. mts. dec. com or through the
Digital company liaison: shani. morris@reo. mts. dec. com
