
To see Charles Dickens's A Christmas Carol onstage is to know again, with a
frisson of joy, how theatrical its author's instincts were.
What, I wonder, would he have made of the coup de theatre with which the
Royal Shakespeare Company's new version of A Christmas Carol opens? The
panoramic view of London in dark silhouette, dominated by the dome of St
Paul's, lifts yards into the sky - and, from the blackness beneath, there
emerge people, also in black: in Bible black, indeed, for Marley's funeral.
I hope Dickens would have marvelled at all this, and at much that follows in
Ian Judge's staging of John Mortimer's new adaptation.
This Christmas Carol, following the haunting RSC precedent of Trevor Nunn's
Nicholas Nickleby, proceeds on three main levels: as a series of stage
pictures, as a stage elucidation of Dickens's text, and as a collage of
Victorian Christmas music. Sometimes the three come thrillingly together: as
when Scrooge snuffs out the Spirit of Christmas Past. We see the conical
snuffing-cap pushing the Spirit down into (and through) the ground; we
follow Scrooge's exhausting travail much as Dickens described it; and
meanwhile the scene is watched by a chorus of Victorians in black, who sing
'Hark the herald angels sing' with warning fierceness. The melodramatic
excitement, the psychological intensity, the sense of Christmas as a
jubilantly lyrical experience that is being threatened by Scrooge - all
these are there together.
Visually, the production is consistently excellent - thanks in particular to
John Gunter's set, Deirdre Clancy's costumes, and Nigel Levings's lighting.
Verbally, Mortimer's text is first-rate; he is plainly in love with Dickens
as both sound and sense. And so are most of Judge's RSC actors, most of them
playing several roles each. A pity that he lets them make too little of some
lines (Scrooge 'carried his own low temperature always about with him') and
some episodes (Belle breaking off her engagement to a younger Scrooge). But
where the production is more frequently flawed is with Nigel Hess's music.
Most of the onstage singing is weak, but the taped music and orchestrations
are worse. The difference a few live instruments - - and less amplification -would make] As an arranger, he could have struck more gold from his
material; but since his material is mainly the classic Christmas carols we
all know, the perfect Dickensian fusion of generosity and sentiment is
achieved now and then.
Clive Francis is a first-rate Scrooge, an antique crustacean who manages to
glow friskily once he learns to drop his shell. Paul Greenwood and Polly
James do good work as the tender Cratchit parents, as do Philip Quast and
Sara Weymouth as Scrooge's laughing nephew and his wife, Cherry Morris and
Peter Warnock as the bubbling old Fezziwigs. The Spirit of Christmas Present
(John Kane) is too bombastic, and Christmas past (Stephen Jean) too mild;
they should be Virgil to Scrooge's Dante. Marley's ghost - so plainly
modelled on Hamlet's papa - is over-miked and under-chained.
But the 18-foot Christmas Yet To Come, hooded and cloaked like a Grim Reaper
with only two skeletal claws visible, is splendid. The party scenes are all
infectious. And the finale, with snow falling through the hovering Christmas
trees and rooftops onto the cast, whose black attire is now illumined by
scarlet winter scarves, is ideal.
Barbican Theatre, EC2
