
After almost four post-unification years in the fog, Germany's central
bankers finally have a reasonably clear view of the future for interest
rates.
Mr Hans Tietmeyer, Bundesbank president, said so himself in mid-May. In case
nobody noticed, directorate colleague Mr Edgar Meister was to be heard
within hours repeating his boss's lines at a meeting with foreign
journalists. 'In the area of central bank interest rates the horizon is
clear for a more extended period,' he said.
Despite the typically fudgy Buba-speak, the expectations of the market and
the Bundesbank for once appeared to be pretty much in tune. Uttered shortly
after the bank's floor discount rate had just been cut further to 4.5 per
cent - making three reductions since the start of the year - the statements
signalled there was no need for any more action on rates for the time being.
Economists agreed, noting that with seven months of the year still to run,
their forecasts of last January that the discount rate would be down to 4
per cent or less by the year's end appeared to be rock-sure safe bets.
Such harmony is unusual at the best of times. That it should have been
achieved while the Bundesbank's main source of inspiration - the M3 measure
of growth in money supply - was apparently less than useless, makes it all
the more remarkable. For the first four months of this year, M3 expanded at
an annualised rate of three times the bank's mid-range target of 5 per cent.
The bank depends on monetary targeting as an early-warning system against
potential inflation. As a rule, excess M3 growth today spells price growth
tomorrow.
But instead of holding back, Mr Tietmeyer's team has continued the process
of salami-slicing interest rates which started in September 1992 when the
discount rate was 8.75 per cent.
As the bank has said repeatedly in accompaniment to its latest rate cuts:
'special factors' have been at work in the M3 formula, which includes cash
in circulation, current, sight and short-term deposit accounts.
Monetary growth rates were boosted at the start of the year by government
tax inducements which led to a sharp jump in loans for house purchases. Many
of these loans were 'parked' in short-term accounts while buyers waited to
exchange contracts. But the most special factor of all was the introduction
of a 30 per cent at-source tax on investment income which set in motion a
cash carousel. Money which had poured out of the country to avoid the levy
came flooding back in in the latter months of 1993. An estimated DM25bn came
in from Luxembourg alone.
Its arrival coincided with a period of uncertainty about interest rates
which prompted many wait-and-see investors to hold the funds in short-term
accounts, rather than in long-term instruments which are excluded from the
M3 calculation.
But as bank directors have made clear, there is no guarantee that that is
the whole story. As Mr Meister said in May, when his colleagues had had
several months to analyse what was going on, it was still not possible to
separate the special factors from the inflationary potential which might be
stored up in the M3 figures.
In the light of this lack of transparency, the Bundesbank's rate-cutting
actions have been seen in some quarters as foolhardy. Others have suggested,
despite protestations to the contrary, that the bank is preparing to abandon
or relax its controversial dependence on medium-term monetary targeting.
Probably the most charitable judgment is that Mr Tietmeyer, after some six
months into the job as controller of German (and European) monetary policy,
is living up to his earlier reputation as an internationally-minded
pragmatist with a touch more flexibility than was evident in the make-up of
Mr Helmut Schlesinger, his predecessor. Lower German rates have had a
welcome and discernible effect on economic recovery prospects both inside
and outside Germany.
But, as private sector economists point out, there are dangers. According to
Mr Thomas Mayer at Goldman Sachs, the main supporting arguments behind this
year's rate cuts so far were that inflation was slowing with little upward
pressure from either the demand or supply sides, and that the aberrations in
M3 could be justifiably ignored because they were temporary.
Inflation is falling, but the pace is painfully slow, and there have been
some uncomfortable signs. As Mr Mayer pointed out recently, the
three-monthly annualised rate of price rises in April was 3 per cent
compared with 2.5 per cent in March. As evidenced by frequent mentions in
Bundesbank directors' speeches in the early part of this year, this measure
of inflation was much in favour - at least while it was significantly below
the year-on-year rate.
In more recent statements, the Bundesbankers have made plain that they hope
or expect that recent 'corrections' to the interest rate structure will
encourage investors at last to siphon the liquidity currently inflating M3
into long-term capital formation. There seem to be few illusions that this
will be a rapid process.
The central bank also appears to hope that general economic conditions and
the popular mood, tempered by falling real disposable incomes - and despite
lower interest rates - will discourage bank borrowing and further help
reduce M3. If investors and borrowers fail to follow the bank's pointers, if
M3 fails to deflate and continues sending blurred signals, the question
arises of how long Mr Tietmeyer's team can continue ignoring the possibility
that inflationary pressure may be mounting undetected.
The bank, faced with calls to scrap its M3 'plaster saint' and seek guidance
by new means, has responded with clear and repeated rejections. Indeed, it
plans to lobby hard to have monetary targeting adopted by the future
European Central Bank.
Mr Meister, when asked about the prospects for money growth coming back into
line, replied: 'When you have a target, you must make an effort to achieve
it.'
Even though the bank probably favours more rate cuts, even if they require a
longer wait until the view of the horizon improves further, Mr Meister's
remark is a reminder that corrective action cannot be ruled out. However
distant the possibility of a rise in German interest rates may seem at
present, Mr Tietmeyer will need no reminders that his main responsibility is
the Bundesbank's reputation, not his own.
