
South Korea yesterday indicated it may pursue a more conciliatory policy
toward North Korea, reversing its recent tough approach to Pyongyang.
The government of President Kim Young-sam has been criticised for its North
Korean policy, which is leaving Seoul increasingly isolated as Washington
and Pyongyang conduct negotiations on possible diplomatic ties.
US diplomats will make an unprecedented visit to the North Korean capital
today to begin talks on setting up liaison offices between the two countries
as part of a deal under which Pyongyang would accept full nuclear
inspections.
The two sides will also meet in Berlin where Mr William Perry, the US
defence secretary, said he was prepared to offer North Korea 'substantial
incentives' in return for Pyongyang dismantling its nuclear weapons
capacity.
The softening of Seoul's stance on the North is believed to result from
talks held in Washington earlier this week between Mr Han Sung-joo, the
South Korean foreign minister, and Mr Warren Christopher, US secretary of
state.
The US agreed that progress in US-North Korean relations would have to be
linked to an improvement in inter-Korean dialogue, but it is believed that
Washington asked South Korea to improve the atmosphere for a resumption of
talks between Seoul and Pyongyang.
In a sign of compromise during the Washington talks, South Korea agreed to
accept liaison offices between the US and North Korea, according to a senior
adviser to the foreign ministry.
The Seoul government has conducted an inconsistent policy over the North
Korean nuclear issue since it erupted 18 months ago, alternating
conciliatory gestures with tough statements. This reflected deep divisions
in the government over the appropriate response to solving the North Korean
problem.
Following the death of North Korean President Kim Il-sung in early July,
President Kim Young-sam adopted a hardline stance toward the North. He
predicted that North Korea was close to collapse and indicated that a
planned summit between the two Koreas would not be held as it would give a
stamp of legitimacy to Pyongyang's new leadership under Mr Kim Jong-il, the
late president's son.
He also ordered a crackdown on leftist students who expressed sympathy for
North Korea, amid allegations that radicals had infiltrated the political
establishment and media.
Analysts said the tough policy was meant to reverse a recent drop in Mr
Kim's popularity and bolster his support among conservatives, including the
7m South Koreans who once lived in the North before escaping after the
communist government took power in 1945.
But the South Korean media have spoken of a 'crisis in diplomacy' in recent
weeks.
