
Microsoft's settlement of anti-trust charges with the US Justice Department
and European competition authorities will have 'no material impact' on
financial performance, according to Mr Bill Gates, chairman and founder of
the software company.
The settlement, which requires Microsoft to modify its operating system
licensing practices, 'eliminates something that could have become a major
distraction', Mr Gates said yesterday.
He reiterated his belief that Microsoft had never done anything
'inappropriate or illegal'. The company's success in selling operating
systems programs for PCs was based on demand, not on licensing terms.
Industry analysts said Microsoft 'got off easy' on Justice Department
charges that it 'built a barricade of exclusionary and unreasonably
restrictive licensing agreements to deny others an opportunity to develop
and market competing products'.
Investors appeared to concur with this view as Microsoft's share price rose
Dollars 1 7/8 yesterday to reach Dollars 50 1/2 by the close.
Mr Gates said Microsoft's future remained dependent upon its ability to
'continue to come up with great products'. The settlement provided the
company with an opportunity to do that without the burden of a costly legal
battle.
Competition authorities had examined several issues raised by competitors,
Microsoft said. Most were not pursued and the settlement covered only
licensing practices and non-disclosure.
The settlement does not address concern in the software industry that
Microsoft gains unfair advantages as a developer of both operating systems,
which control the basic functions of a computer, and applications programs
such as wordprocessors, games and spreadsheets.
Microsoft is the largest seller of applications for use with its own Windows
operating system. This dual role is its principal advantage, according to
software industry executives, because Microsoft's applications developers
have earlier and better access to details of next-generation systems than
their competitors.
However, Mr Bill Neukom, Microsoft's general counsel, said this issue did
not come up in the discussions. 'We can conclude that the government decided
that it had no basis on which to act on these complaints.'
For the next six and a half years, the duration of the settlement,
Microsoft's business activities will be monitored by the US Justice
Department and European competition authorities.
Editorial Comment, Page 15
Lex, Page 16
