
Sir, Michael Smith's article, 'Future of Sizewell C rests on 3.7p claim'
(June 21), leaves me with the fear that the UK nuclear review will
degenerate into a battle of numbers. Results of cost calculations for large
projects depend on a host of assumptions, with many having a big effect on
the outcome. By the choice of a judicious mixture of assumptions, all within
the plausible range, one can get any result one wishes. We are left with all
parties claiming that their numbers are correct and the others' wrong.
Rather than such a battle, which usually generates much heat but little
light, there are many fundamental issues surrounding nuclear energy which
need debate. Just to mention two:
Whether justified or not, there is a considerable public opposition to
nuclear energy. In other countries (Germany, US, Sweden) this has led to
political parties taking different views, resulting in near-paralysis. Can
one have a successful nuclear industry in a democracy unless there is a
degree of consensus, such as exists in France and Japan, and is this
achievable in the UK?
A highly competitive market structure of many players, which appears to be
the aim of present government thinking, tends to lead away from long-term
strategic decisions to greater emphasis on short-term profit maximisation.
It is not clear how expansion of nuclear energy with its large unit
investment, long delay between decision and start-up and its many political
risks, can fit into such a model unless government decides to affect
commercial decisions by reducing commercial risks. And that raises the issue
of government role. Can investment in electricity be left to the play of
short-term market forces or is there need for a strategic steer? If the
latter, who, except government, can/should provide it?
There are strong differences of views on such points. Their debate will be
more illuminating about the future role of nuclear power in the UK and how
to achieve it than arcane arguments about relative cost advantages of
hypothetical power plants during the first 30 years of the next century.
Peter Beck,
associate fellow,
Royal Institute of International Affairs,
10 St James's Square,
London SW1
