
California's Netscape Communications has tens of thousands of eager
customers for its first product, a 'navigator' for the global Internet.
Which is not surprising, because this Silicon Valley software start-up
company is handing out free copies of its Mosaic computer program to anyone
who asks.
That might seem an odd way to go about building a new business, but Jim
Clark, chairman and co-founder of Netscape, has his eye on a prize far
bigger than the revenues he may be sacrificing today.
He believes that giving away the Beta version of the Mosaic navigator will
help garner support for Netscape's much more ambitious plans to transform
the Internet - a global network of millions of computers - from a playground
for computer enthusiasts into the primary route for electronic commerce.
Until earlier this year, Clark was an Internet sceptic. As chairman of
Silicon Graphics, a leading manufacturer of computer work-stations he
founded in 1982, he had been pursuing interactive television as the future
path for the information superhighway.
Then he met Marc Andreesen. A 23-year-old cyber-star computer science
graduate, Andreesen created Mosaic, a software program that enables even
computer novices to explore the Internet's vast resources.
Since Andreesen and a group of fellow students working at the University of
Illinois' National Center for Supercomputing Applications launched Mosaic on
to the Internet last year, it has been used by an estimated 2m people.
'I realised that Mosaic on the Internet was the way to create all sorts of
interactive multimedia services,' says Clark. 'While the television industry
is moving slowly toward interactive multimedia services, the Internet is
spawning more and more sophisticated applications every day.'
Clark resigned from Silicon Graphics and formed Netscape last April, hiring
Andreesen and half a dozen other former students from the University of
Illinois to get the venture off the ground.
Starting from scratch, Clark claims, the team created a faster, more robust
version of Mosaic as well as a 'NetSite' program for businesses that want to
create interactive services on the Internet.
Like the original Mosaic, Netscape's software provides Internet users with a
relatively simple way to find information using 'hypertext' linking between
different documents and databases.
By clicking on a highlighted word in a hypertext document, you are
automatically transferred to related material which might be stored in the
same computer data base or in another one half a world away.
Were you to read this article via the Internet, for example, there would
probably be opportunities to refer back to other FT articles about the
Internet. You might also be able to click on the word Mosaic to access the
NASC Internet server, or pick Netscape to download the company's free
software, or switch to Silicon Graphics' Internet server and read about its
products.
'When you click on a hyperlink, you initiate a process,' says Clark. 'Today
that is typically the retrieval of a document, a movie or an audio
recording.'
The Internet is essentially a set of standards: communications protocols
that define how data is moved from one computer to another, says Clark. 'The
Internet is going to be the de facto standard for all kinds of interactive
multimedia services.'
Just as the establishment of technology standards spawned the personal
computer revolution, Clark sees these Internet standards as likely to create
vast opportunities in interactive multimedia services. 'Those companies that
are writing applications today are going to be best poised for the
opportunity to create interactive digital businesses in the future.'
However, there are several technical barriers that must be overcome before
the Internet is ready for the mass market. Today, the infrastructure of the
Internet is primitive, says Clark. Standard telephone line access is too
slow to deliver video, and it takes several minutes just to retrieve a
colour picture. But as telephone and cable TV companies upgrade their
networks, the Internet will become faster and more versatile, he predicts.
Partnerships with telephone companies are a central element of Netscape's
plans to bring the Internet to a bigger audience. 'By early next year there
will be several telecommunications companies announcing that they provide
Internet-related services,' says Clark. 'I call it Internet dialtone. It
will become one of the basic services that 'phone companies offer'.
Security is another problem on the Internet. Today there is no way of
ensuring that sensitive information such as credit card numbers can be
protected from computer hackers - a serious impediment to electronic
commerce.
However, using advanced encryption technology from RSA Data Security, a
leader in the field, Netscape has created a secure version of its software,
which it aims to sell to companies that want to do business on the Internet.
The ability to track and bill Internet users is another essential element of
Netscape's plan to help usher in electronic commerce. For electronic
publishers, one of the most important things is building in the ability to
track subscribers in order to attract advertisers, says Clark. 'We believe
that advertising is an absolutely fundamental part of this.'
The biggest barrier that Netscape faces, however, is persuading businesses
to ply their wares in the electronic marketplace. Handing out free software
that draws tens of thousands of potential consumers to the Internet is
merely the first step.
