
On landing at Gibraltar airport, it is easiest to walk through the frontier
into Spain. If you are in a car, you could be delayed. A poster warning of
'very dangerous' terrorists greets you and dogs wait to catch a whiff of
drugs. Go a little further and you find the Guardia Civil parked by the sea,
binoculars searching for speedboat-borne smugglers from Morocco.
Just over the border is La Linea where, for 200 years, British servicemen
rested from the Rock's confined life. The closing of the frontier for many
years up to 1982 was hard for La Linea and the country around. Moroccans
took the jobs Spaniards had held and the easy way to the Costa del Sol from
Britain, then Spain's biggest market, was shut.
This helped Malaga airport, but reaching Marbella by the old coast road was
a nasty and dangerous drive. Today, though, the motorway and bypasses make
it easy from either airport. Gibraltar has fewer flights and smaller planes
but is probably preferable for places west of Marbella. And its duty-free
prices are phenomenal.
There is still unspoilt country close to the border and up in the hills
(where people suffered badly in and after the 1936-39 civil war for
supporting the republicans). Cork oaks abound. The Rock rules the sea view,
although often it is surrounded by fog. Beyond, and not far away, are
Africa's Atlas mountains.
The 1,618 hectare (4,000 acre) Sotogrande estate, between Marbella and
Gibraltar, pioneered smart development on the Costa del Sol and is now 32
years old. Its first golf course was completed in 1965 and the second in
1975. Wide roads were built and utilities installed from the start.
Today, it is a bit like California, a mix of Mediterranean scrub and lush
trees, flowers and lawns where the ground has been reclaimed and watered.
Indeed, water is not a problem for Sotogrande, which extracts what it needs
from the Gaudiaro river that flows through the estate (and brings migratory
birds).
The owner of the estate is the Sotogrande Public Company, which has at least
20 years' more sales in prospect before the estate is full. Even then, it
will not be cluttered. The main shareholder is Carlo de Benedetti's Cofir
group.
Like the rest of the Costa del Sol, boom and gloom has been the story of
Sotogrande. The boom years were 1971-74 and 1983-87 but the recent decline
started late in 1989, a year when 43 per cent of all foreign investment in
Spain went on property in Malaga province; by last year, prices were 40-50
per cent down on 1989-90.
The fall of the pound in September 1992 made matters worse, while lower
interest rates hit British pensioners. The subsequent decline of the peseta
(now around Pta200 to Pounds 1) has been some recompense, but many homes are
for re-sale along the coast.
It looks now, however, as if prices have bottomed; many more people are
inquiring and some are buying. In Sotogrande, inquire at the sales office;
elsewhere, Hamptons/Randal-Williams and BD Wood offer a good selection.
Sotogrande slashed prices last year on 43 unsold apartments and only seven
are now left (at realistic and attractive prices between Pta16m and
Pta33.6m).
That has released cash for the first phases of a new inland marina where
house prices (Pta18m to Pta29m) include the entrance fee for the two beach
clubs - which are still old-fashioned enough to separate children and
adults. A mooring costs Pta4.5m.
To maintain standards, the company has decided to stop selling other plots
to outside developers and, instead, is building the houses itself. Most cost
from Pta30m to Pta40m - the cheapest is Pta27.2m and the dearest Pta60.5m.
They are ideal for the three golf courses and two polo grounds: the sport
still attracts the British army from Gibraltar.
Golf has been a boom sport in Spain in the past two decades. Robert Trent
Jones laid out the Sotogrande courses, of which the best is Valderrama (a
handsome, private club which hopes to host the Ryder Cup in 1997). The
nine-hole La Canada course is the only municipal layout in Spain and there
are plans to build another 27 holes, making 72 in all.
Sotogrande is not a British enclave - about half the sales are to Spaniards,
mostly from Madrid and the Basque country. But the British are nibbling
again and the Germans now constitute about 15 per cent of the market. Among
the rest are people from Hong Kong, South Africa, northern Italy and
Morocco. An international school follows the British and Spanish systems.
Marina Puente Romano is an apartment-only development east of Sotogrande and
just west of Marbella, next to the Puente Romano luxury hotel. La Concha
mountain dominates the view on the land side, and a neighbouring mosque,
built by the Saudi royal family, is a surprise reminder of the Moors who
occupied southern Spain. The Roman bridge (puente romano) survives in the
hotel garden.
The 234 apartments are built around three gardens, each with its own
swimming pool. Best of the gardens is the Japanese - the others are Persian
and Andalucian. The entrance fee for the top-class on-site tennis club is
included in the price of the apartments. Although serious marketing began
only last year, 35 per cent are sold already, with a mix of buyers similar
to Sotogrande.
Prices range from Pta33m to Pta120m (for penthouses which have their own
private pools on the balcony). Cheaper units are farther from the sea but
the Persian Garden is only 20m back: it had received planning permission,
and work had begun, before a law was passed that all new buildings must be
100m back. Basement parking and storerooms are extra while the monthly
community charge includes water.
Close by is Marbella, now a much cleaner town thanks to its controversial
mayor, Jesus Gil y Gil, who has tackled its drugs and crime image with
gusto. The old part, particularly, is well worth an hour or two's
meandering.
Further information in Spain (dialling code from the UK 010-34): Hamptons
and B. Randal-Williams, Marbella, 52-861 909; Puente Romano, 52-825 882;
Sotogrande, 56-790 300; BD Wood, Marbella, 52-883 710.
In London: Knight Frank & Rutley, 071-629 8171.
