
Japanese weekend newspapers have an endearing fondness for parish-pump news,
as if there were an unwritten rule against startling exhausted salaryman
readers during days off.
As always on a Sunday, the Japan Times decorates its front page with a
colour photograph of the flower of the week, yesterday a wild clematis. The
Daily Yomiuri leads its columns with a mild crisis in the prison service,
caused by a shortage of prison library books written in Farsi, for the
growing number of Iranian inmates.
On the sports pages, the top story in both papers is the failure of the
latest attempt to solve the US professional baseball strike. This is a
remarkable story to Japanese readers, few of whom would ever dream of going
on strike, let alone over a game where honour is at stake.
No labour troubles in Japanese baseball, where Ichiro Suzuki of the Orix
Blue Wave made his 185th hit of the season on Saturday, well on the way to
beating the 44-year Japanese record of 191 hits in a season, established by
the late Fumio Fujimara of the Hanshin Tigers. What is more, Fujimara had
the benefit of a 140-game season, 10 games more than allowed to Suzuki in
today's Pacific League.
Inside, the Japan Times' main editorial turns its back on international
affairs, despite the fact that this has been an interesting week, with a
nasty row between China and Taiwan over whether Taiwanese President Lee
Teng-hui should accept an invitation to the Asian games in Hiroshima early
next month.
Instead, the Japan Times offers its collective wisdom on why the government
should be nicer to the aged, no disrespect intended to the septuagenarian
prime minister Tomiichi Murayama.
The paper's editor is moved by the latest annual age count from the Health
and Welfare Ministry which shows that Japan has a record 5,593 centenarians,
an increase of 791 on last year.
The grey wave is a big story in Japan. This is not just because the average
lifespan is the longest in the world, at 76 years for men and 82 for women.
Japan's elderly are also its biggest national headache. The proportion of
pensioners is rising faster than anywhere else in the world, with horrendous
consequences for the government's finances.
The Japan Times offers no solutions, but instead ticks off council workers
in Saitama prefecture for disconnecting a 79-year-old lady's
air-conditioning on the grounds that it was an expensive luxury for someone
on welfare assistance.
Japan has had its hottest summer for decades and even now the temperatures
are still in the 30s, so it was no surprise that the poor old woman ended up
in hospital, suffering from dehydration.
The whole country will have a chance to draw the moral from this sad tale at
leisure on Thursday, Respect for the Aged Day, one of Japan's 14 national
holidays.
Not that the rest of world has completely passed the weekend press by.
Simply that the international stories tend to be treated with less interest -with the perennial exception of news about the US, the focal centre of
Japan's view of the outside world.
Nowhere in the press, for example, is it possible to find a word of advice
on how Mr Murayama should wriggle out of the diplomatic embarrassment
presented by Mr Lee's possible attendance at the Asian games.
Among the sports papers, Chunichi Sport drily points out that the matter is
too political to be handled by the games organisers. Daily Sport reports
without comment a government official's remark that China, with which Japan
has diplomatic relations, is more important than Taiwan, with which it has
no formal ties.
The Nikkei Weekly does offer the prime minister some advice, not on how to
resolve the games dilemma but on how to minimise the damage. It counsels Mr
Murayama to cancel a planned official visit to China next month and stay at
home.
Another reason not go is that Mr Murayama risks offending the Taiwanese by
being in Beijing on October 10, Taiwan's politically sensitive national day.
Why is it so hard for Japan to choose between China and Taiwan? It may be
something to do with the growing number of Japanese businesses opening up in
Taiwan, the latest reported last week being Fuji Bank.
Having to make hard choices also interferes with Tokyo's policy of keeping
as many friends as possible in Asia. No wonder the Japanese press prefers to
stay on the sidelines of the diplomatic fracas over the Asian games.
Choosing the flower of the week is far more civilised.
