
The world tungsten market, severely depressed since 1989, has picked up
smartly this year, and experts are already worrying about a future shortage
of the metal in the face of surging demand.
Government and industry representatives who met for two days earlier this
week in Geneva said they expected strong growth in tungsten demand this year
and next allied to world economic recovery.
With many tungsten mines now closed, especially in industrialised countries,
the extra demand is being met from stocks. But once stocks dry up 'the
market may face serious instability in event of a sharp recovery in world
tungsten consumption', according to the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, which sponsored the meeting.
The price of ammonium paratungstate, a key intermediate product, has doubled
since the beginning of 1994 to around Dollars 93-95 per mtu (10kg) in
Europe. This, Unctad says, has led the industry to consider reopening
conversion facilities. However, prices of tungsten concentrates remain too
low to reverse mine closures.
World mine production of tungsten slumped from a peak of 60,426 tonnes
(metal content), in 1989 to 30,286 tonnes in 1993 the lowest level since the
1960s. That compared with consumption of ores and concentrates of 32,967
tonnes last year.
Mines in industrialised countries are producing only a tenth of their output
at the beginning of the 1980s and in developing countries only about a
fifth. Even in China, the world's biggest producer, mine production has more
than halved since the late 1980s to less than 20,000 tonnes in 1993.
Unctad says the recent imposition by the US and the European Union of
anti-dumping duties on imports of Chinese concentrates gives an opening to
Russia - though it too has suffered from disrupted production.
In the much longer term the outlook for tungsten is mixed, according to Mr
Peter Johnson of the US Metal Powder Industries Federation. He told the
meeting that while industrial developments offered potentially important
market opportunities - notably in electronics, medical equipment, armaments
and cutting tools - some traditional uses were likely to decline.
Cermets and ceramics were increasingly used in place of tungsten carbide and
the longer life of cutting tools was reducing replacement demand. The US
industry would also have to face up to the impact of lower spending on
defence equipment and intense foreign competition in aircraft applications,
Mr Johnson said.
