
The death of North Korean President Kim Il-sung has suddenly complicated
efforts to resolve the dispute over international inspections of the North's
nuclear facilities.
Mr Kim died just as the US began negotiations with North Korean officials on
Friday in Geneva in what was regarded as a significant round of discussions
to break the impasse. His death also came shortly before he was scheduled to
meet South Korean President Kim Young-sam in an unprecedented summit on July
25 in Pyongyang to discuss the nuclear question.
Both the US-North Korean talks and the Korean summit have been indefinitely
postponed.
Meanwhile, the Group of Seven and Russian leaders in Naples yesterday urged
North Korea to ensure 'total transparency' for its nuclear programme and
also to go ahead with its proposed dialogue with South Korea and the US,
despite the death of its leader.
The Naples summit communique told the authorities in Pyongyang to 'remove,
once and for all, the suspicions surrounding their nuclear activities' by
complying with their international obligations.
North Korean officials had indicated stress related to tensions over the
nuclear issue in recent weeks may have contributed to Mr Kim's heart
failure.
South Korea said yesterday it has not yet heard from the North whether it
wants to hold the summit, although US President Bill Clinton said in Naples
that Pyongyang indicated to Washington that it plans to proceed with the
meeting at a later date.
Officials in Seoul expressed optimism that North Korea might take advantage
of Mr Kim's death to improve relations with the US rapidly in the hope that
it will help stabilise the new Pyongyang government of Mr Kim Jong-il, the
late president's son and designated successor. They added that a Korean
summit is unlikely to occur until the transfer of power to Mr Kim has been
completed.
The junior Mr Kim took public responsibility last year for threatening to
withdraw North Korea from the nuclear non-proliferation treaty in a step
that triggered the dispute.
Some South Korean officials believe, however, that Mr Kim and his father may
have deliberately provoked the crisis as a ploy to force US to the
negotiating table and offer diplomatic recognition to Pyongyang in exchange
for full nuclear inspections.
Another hopeful sign is that North Korea is continuing to allow inspectors
from the International Atomic Energy Agency to monitor nuclear activity at
its Yongbyon facilities.
The late president recently agreed to suspend the North's nuclear operations
in exchange for the new round of talks with the US on possible diplomatic
recognition and economic aid from Washington. After the first session of
US-North Korean talks on Friday, both sides described the discussions as
'very useful and productive'.
An adviser to President Boris Yeltsin said Russia's main concern was that
there be no instability in North Korea. He welcomed reports that the
situation there remained calm and voiced the hope that the US-North Korean
dialogue would be soon resumed.
Mr Warren Christopher, US Secretary of State, said if Pyongyang complied
with international demands over its nuclear programme, the US would welcome
a chance to meet the new North Korean leader. He said that Kim Jong-il is
the likely successor, although nothing could be taken for granted.
