
There is a story, at once apocryphal and instructive, told about Jamaican
coffee in recent years.
A neighbouring country (never named) with which Jamaica has agreements for
co-operation in agriculture, sent a team of agronomists, botanists and
climatologists to the island's Blue Mountains to study the region's coffee.
The group then went home, located mountains which appeared similar and, at
identical altitudes, tried to replicate Blue Mountain coffee. To Jamaica's
relief, the experiment failed.
Success would have brought significant gain. 'While the average price
obtained for coffee from other important producing nations, such as Colombia
and Brazil, stands at about Dollars 1.00 per pound, the Jamaican Blue
Mountain coffee fetches prices up to Dollars 10.50 per pound,' says Mr John
Pickersgill, general manager of the Coffee Industry Board, reflecting the
industry's conclusion that coffee produced on 15,000 acres in the Blue
Mountains is the best in the world.
There is not much of it, but the industry believes production can be
significantly expanded and these high prices maintained. Estimated demand
for Jamaican coffee is four times what the island is producing now. The
poorer cousins of the premium Blue Mountain variety are also doing well.
Lowland varieties - Prime Jamaican and High Mountain - command prices
averaging Dollars 5 per pound.
These prices have spawned plans for increased production - built on the
recovery of the industry after it was devastated by a hurricane which ground
its way across the island in 1988. Production of 4.5m pounds last year is
expected to reach 11m pounds by the year 2000, with earnings reaching
between Dollars 90m and Dollars 100m.
The ingredients which make Blue Mountain coffee are a very rare mixture. The
first is location: in the Blue Mountain range, the trees benefit from a
coincidence of elements such as cloud cover, rainfall, temperature and soil
types, which all determine the characteristics and flavour of the beans. Mr
Pickersgill is forecasting a fall in production for the current crop year,
which runs from August to July, because of changes in the weather.
Production is expected to be about 4m pounds because unseasonally heavy
rains came when the trees were flowering. 'There has been some disquiet in
the market because of this, but there is no cause for concern, especially
among the traditional buyers,' Mr Pickersgill says.
The traditional buyers are the Japanese, who take about 85 per cent of
Jamaica's coffee. (In the 1960s the big market for Blue Mountain coffee was
the UK, until the Jamaican industry discovered that most was being
re-exported to Japan and started direct shipments.) Japanese companies have
become important investors in Jamaica's coffee industry. There is also heavy
demand, mainly for Blue Mountain coffee, in the US which takes about 10 per
cent of the product. New markets are being encouraged in south east Asia and
western and central Europe.
The industry has had to struggle with domestic economic developments which
have affected all sectors of agriculture. Farmers seeking loans for
expansion of farms and the development of new ones cannot afford current
interest rates of more than 60 per cent, says Mr Pickersgill.
The devaluation of the Jamaican currency and high inflation have also made
inputs such as weed killers, pesticides and fertilisers very expensive for
some farmers, while transport costs are high and roads are poor.
Another nagging worry is the persistent threat, created by the high market
value of Blue Mountain coffee, of counterfeiting and misrepresentation of
the Jamaican product, with attempts to pass poorer quality varieties as
being genuinely Jamaican. This could damage the international reputation of
the Jamaican product and harm the industry.
Mr Pickersgill says: 'There have been some attempts at misrepresentation but
we have managed to reduce the incidence of this by being very vigilant - and
sometimes dictatorial.'
