
A former Lloyd's underwriter who worked for the Gooda Walker agency came
under pressure to mislead Names about the extent of losses suffered by his
syndicate in the late 1980s, he told the High Court in London yesterday.
Mr Anthony Willard, an underwriter on the Gooda Walker syndicate 299, which
lost heavily after the Piper Alpha oil rig disaster, said he was told to
rewrite a letter to exaggerate the wealth of the syndicate in the wake of
the explosion.
The evidence emerged during a highly emotional and strained
cross-examination of Mr Willard in the High Court action brought by 3,095
lossmaking Gooda Walker Names - the individuals whose assets have
traditionally supported the Lloyd's insurance market.
Mr Willard told the court that in 1989 Mr Anthony Gooda, the agency's former
chairman, rejected his first letter as too pessimistic. 'He wanted me to
write a more optimistic letter, it does not have to be the truth.'
The accusation was one of a series made by Mr Willard against Mr Gooda and
Mr Derek Walker, the agency's former leading underwriter.
He accused Mr Walker of 'a lot of interference' in the business of syndicate
299, which specialised in marine insurance. He said Mr Walker encouraged him
to take on inappropriate 'time and distance' policies. These are reinsurance
policies allowing syndicates to manage reserves against 'long-tail' claims,
which come many years after the start of policies.
'He attempted to get me to write risks that I did not consider to be a valid
marine risk,' Mr Willard said.
On one occasion, Mr Walker and another broker, Mr Andrew Goodyear, wanted
him to write reinsurance for the non-marine syndicate 164 'which was thought
to be in danger of going through the top'.
'I think it was Derek Walker who said 'That is no problem, we have a tame
company, they would write it, they could disguise it as marine and you could
write it',' Mr Willard said.
He had replied that the auditors would have to be informed but Mr Walker had
then responded: 'Surely, Tony, you do not tell your auditors everything, do
you?'
Mr Willard refused to write the business and told Mr Gooda at the end of the
meeting 'I do not think this firm can stand my honesty any more'.
He told the court he had come under 'considerable stick' from fellow
directors who suggested that 'instead of telling the truth, I should be
keeping quiet, putting my head down and writing more business'.
Mr Willard said he was brought up a long time ago to act in the utmost good
faith. 'That went out the window at Lloyd's some time ago,' he told the
court.
