
A series of scandals has robbed Costa Rica's leading presidential candidate
of his commanding lead in the opinion polls, as one of the dirtiest election
campaigns in the Central American country's history draws to a close.
Mr Jose Mara Figueres of the opposition National Liberation Party is now
even with or slightly behind his opponent, Mr Miguel Angel Rodrguez of the
ruling Social Christian Unity Party, in the election on Sunday, according to
most polls.
The constitution prohibits President Rafael Angel Calderon from running for
re-election.
Mr Figueres, son of a popular former president, Mr Jose 'Pepe' Figueres, was
in front by at least seven percentage points in the autumn but his fortunes
have tumbled through scandals and accusations, including allegations that he
was involved in the murder of a drug dealer 20 years ago.
Given the popularity of his father, this was to be an election for Mr
Figueres to win easily. But an unpleasant court battle got his campaign off
to a poor start in October.
Mr Figueres sued for libel and slander two authors, the brothers David and
Jose Romero, whose best-selling 1991 book, The Chemise Case, linked him with
the unsolved murder of a suspected drug dealer.
In dramatic testimony, Mr Figueres denied the killing but a Costa Rican
judge, in a ruling on November 30, upheld a previous judgement absolving the
authors.
Mr Figueres, whose father was president at the time of the killing, had
vowed to resign if he lost the case. Now, though, he is pressing on - and
has even claimed victory after one of the Romeros' witnesses was adjudged to
have slandered him during a television interview. 'I'm not going to retire
or take a single step back. This is won and won cleanly,' said Mr Figueres.
Mr Rodrguez has capitalised on the upset and has attacked his rival over
complaints that a leading television journalist was fired after pressure
from the Figueres campaign team. Mr Rodrguez's campaign advertising called
Mr Figueres 'a threat to the freedom of the press'.
The latter was also implicated, last month, in a mining investment scandal
of the early-1980s. The public prosecutor's office ruled last week that Mr
Figueres was involved in the scandal but could not be charged because of the
statute of limitations.
In response, the Figueres team has claimed that Mr Rodrguez had a role in
the shipping of tainted beef to the US in the 1980s, when he ran a beef
export company.
The mud-slinging has done little to indicate where the candidates would take
the country over the next four years. The two leading parties claim to be
radically different, but they tend to contest the middle ground.
Both candidates say they would continue a 10-year programme of reduced
government spending and privatisation, and would continue to integrate the
economy with its Central American neighbours. Five nations of the region
signed a landmark pact this year to create a free-trade bloc, but Costa Rica
reserved the right to collect its own customs duties and to prevent free
movement of labour.
The National Liberation party tends to be more concerned with maintaining
social programmes, while the Social Christian Unity party favours free
market economic reforms.
A simpler view of Costa Rican politics suggests that Mr Figueres will win
because it is his party's turn. The two parties have exchanged power at
every election but one since 1948.
Costa Rica still has the richest and most stable economy in the region and
elections tend to be free of fraud and violence.
Even so, the nation is facing new economic and social tensions. Foreign debt
of more than Dollars 4bn represents 62 per cent of annual gross domestic
product of Dollars 6.5bn.
Recent administrations have reduced the debt through a Brady plan
restructuring, cutting government spending and introducing austerity
measures. But wages have not kept pace with inflation and taxes, even though
annual inflation has been cut to 9 per cent over the past 12 months.
Costa Rica's traditional exports have also suffered: bananas from
uncertainty about exports to the European Union and coffee from falling
world prices which led the country, with other coffee producers, to withhold
20 per cent of output from October 1.
Together with rising imports, this produced a trade deficit of Dollars 833m
last year, nearly three times that of 1989.
Costa Rica has endured international criticism over its labour and human
rights records. In a report in October, the US labour group, the AFL-CIO,
said unions in Costa Rica were not legally protected. Mr Calderon's
government was embarrassed and outraged, but worried by the prospect of US
sanctions. It approved in November labour reforms that appeased the US
group.
This criticism, with a recent report from Amnesty International accusing
Costa Rica of human rights violations, have been embarrassments for Costa
Ricans who consider themselves above such charges.
For all that, Costa Rica has lots to brag about, as the candidates daily
remind voters. A growing tourism industry has offset faltering commodity
sales, making it the main source of revenue.
Some Dollars 505m was earned from 700,000 'ecotourists' this year, twice as
many as in 1989. Growth has remained robust: 6.5 per cent last year,
compared with 7.8 per cent in 1992.
