
Geoffrey Whalen, who as chief executive of Peugeot Talbot has overseen a
renaissance of the French car-maker's UK subsidiary during the past 11
years, is to leave the company at the end of the year, though he will remain
on the board in a non-executive capacity.
The parting is said to be entirely amicable and the powers-that-be at
Peugeot's group headquarters in Paris are content to leave Peugeot Talbot's
operations in another English pair of hands. Whalen's successor is to be his
long-serving aide Richard Parham (far right), ten years Whalen's junior, who
has been assistant MD at Ryton since 1981 - initially under Whalen's own
predecessor, the late Sir George Turnbull.
'The initiative is entirely mine,' stresses Whalen (right), whose angular,
bespectacled and often suede-shoed appearance gives him more the demeanour
of a university don than a motor magnate. 'There have been no rows, no
disputes - we now have a good facility and a good future at Ryton (the car
plant near Coventry); I'm nearly 59 and now is a good time to leave and go
and do something different.'
What that something will be Whalen is not yet prepared to say - 'except that
I don't have any intentions of going off to run a rival car company'.
Whalen is such a motor industry institution - he has twice been president of
the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders and is currently its deputy
president - that it tends to be forgotten that he cut his career teeth not
on motor cars but in the coal industry. He worked in industrial relations
for the National Coal Board for seven years before joining first motor
components group AC Delco, then British Leyland and - after a brief spell
with food group Ranks Hovis McDougall - Peugeot Talbot, as personnel
director, in 1980.
The Peugeot Talbot Whalen joined was a very different animal from today's.
It was then mired in losses which would total nearly Pounds 400m over almost
a decade before the financial turnround - a Pounds 3.1m net profit - came in
1984.
Since then it has been profitable for all but one of the past ten years,
with its UK market share jumping from just over 1 per cent to the current 8
per cent. Car production over the same period rose from 20,000 a year to a
peak 100,000-plus, with around 90,000 expected next year.
