
A survey conducted last year by the US magazine Information Week found that
90 per cent of the executives questioned said computer games were available
in their office. Sixty per cent said they were played several times weekly
within their company.
California-based accountancy company SBT estimates that US businesses lose
as much as Dollars 100bn (Pounds 67bn) a year in non-work related use of
computers.
Clearly, computer games should not be played for fun at work. There are
enough problems over determining what productivity benefits work-related
computer use delivers.
While business applications are often described by their creators as
'productivity packages', computer games could just as easily be described as
productivity killers. Yet the same leading vendors of business software
often distribute games with their software. The most popular game in US
offices is the card game Solitaire, distributed free with the Microsoft
Windows user interface. And US software mail order companies sometimes
package special promotional deals that include business software with free
games.
Games are also clogging the Internet international network, hampering its
use for commercial purposes. The culprit seems to be Netrek, a space
exploration game that involves two teams of eight players exploring a
computer-generated universe and interacting with each other. It is designed
to be played on networks and players say the game is addictive - so much so
that at least one US company is trying to work out a way of charging the
public to play it.
Computer game developers are well aware that many people play their games in
the office. As a result, several games have a feature that flashes a dummy
spreadsheet on to the computer display at a touch of a button; this is
useful for when the boss walks by.
However, certain games can be beneficial if used to educate staff and allow
companies to explore different business scenarios. California-based Maxis,
best known for its Sim series of computer games, uses its game software
technology to create applications that model business operations. It has
developed a package for Pacific Gas and Electric, called SimPower, that
allows management to simulate the impact of their decisions on power
consumption.
Banning computer games from work altogether would be difficult. But several
large corporations in the US such as Sears Roebuck, Coca-Cola Foods and Ford
Motor already have restrictions on game playing. Ford uses special software
that scans worker's computer systems to make sure there are no games.
However, some smaller companies, especially in the US, approve of game
playing as long as it is out in the open. Those which actually encourage
game playing at work - mostly in the US  - have properbudgets for game
purchasing. At some companies, staff at all levels will play games against
each other while connected to the office network. This is said to encourage
an esprit de corps. Even so, its value in increasing company productivity is
still questionable.
Anyone who has played computer games knows how easy it is to lose an hour or
more without realising it.
So while a policy to ban computer games at work will certainly be unpopular,
it may be a necessary step. If staff want to relax, a short walk outside
will certainly be more beneficial.
Studies have shown that computer game players often experience high stress
levels during play. And now that computers are so cheap, there are plenty of
opportunities for playing the games at home.
