
Israel's leaders have made unusual efforts to appeal to President Hafez
al-Assad of Syria as negotiations towards a comprehensive Middle East peace
continued in Washington yesterday.
Mr Yitzhak Rabin, the Israeli prime minister, said yesterday his government
'yearned' to strike a lasting regional peace agreement this year and urged
Mr Assad to 'go the extra mile' and assure Israelis that Syria had
long-term, peaceful intentions towards the Jewish state.
In a solemn address to the parliamentary assembly of the Council of Europe
in Strasbourg, Mr Rabin urged Syria and other Arab states not to lose
precious time and to seek bilateral agreements in Washington. 'Israel is
ready for peace and willing to take risks and make dramatic decisions but
any risk or decision should be well calculated.'
Mr Rabin said Israel needed to be sure that Syria genuinely means peace and
security. 'We are looking for a peace that would last for generations to
come - a peace that will put an end to the suffering and fear of all the
peoples of the Middle East.'
In an emotional moment, Mr Rabin recalled his days as army chief of staff
during the 1967 Six Day War: 'Only one who year after year stands facing
thousands and ten of thousands of silent mourners in the cemeteries on our
memorial day - only one who has seen worlds destroyed and families
devastated - knows just how important is peace to us and also for our
neighbours.'
However, he also warned Palestinian extremists who reject peace with Israel.
'To them I say: no knife, no stone, no firearm, no bomb, no landmine will
stop us. We will continue to strike hard without flinching . . . We strive
for peace but we will continue to fight for our right to live in Israel in
peace and tranquility.'
Mr Rabin accused some European nations of ambivalence towards the Jewish
state and urged Europeans to help break the Arab economic boycott of Israel.
He said Europe should take a more direct role in Middle East peace talks,
adding that Israel did not need Europe's money which should be directed to
Palestinians to help consolidate the peace agreement. He also made a
surprise offer to allow Libyan leader Muammer Gadaffi to visit Islamic holy
sites in Jerusalem.
Mr Rabin's remarks came a day after Israel's President Ezer Weizman showered
rare praise on the Syrian leader, saying he held the key to Middle East
peace and was a man of integrity, sincerity and honour. 'I see the key to
further peace in the Middle East in finding a solution to Syria, which
obviously depends on President Assad. And I still see Assad as a leader
through whom peace can be achieved,' Mr Weizman said during a visit to
Turkey.
Israeli officials said secret bilateral talks with Syria in Washington have
shown signs of progress since Mr Assad said he wanted 'normal' peaceful
relations with Israel during a meeting with President Bill Clinton in Geneva
earlier this month.
As Israel focussed on peace talks with Syria, Israeli and Palestinian
officials continued lengthy talks in Cairo to hammer out an agreed document
that would break the deadlock on implementation of Palestinian self-rule in
the Gaza Strip and West Bank area of Jericho. Israeli officials sought to
dampen hopes that Mr Shimon Peres, Israeli foreign minister, and Mr Yassir
Arafat, PLO chairman, would sign an agreement when they meet in Switzerland
at the weekend.
