
Home Shopping Network, the leading US cable television shopping network, has
acquired Internet Shopping Network, a California start-up company, in a move
intended to create the first large scale on-line electronic shopping mall,
accessible to millions of personal computer users.
'The Internet, with its estimated 25m users, presents us with the
opportunity to expand our retailing expertise from television into this
important venue,' said Mr Gerald Hogan, HSN president and chief executive.
'We are planning a large-scale push into the digital environment.'
With sales in the first half of 1994 of Dollars 548m (Pounds 353.5m), HSN is
the biggest US television shopping company. Viewers order products
demonstrated on HSN by phone using a credit card.
ISN, founded in June 1993, has been selling goods over the Internet, the
global information network, for just three months. Sales figures were not
revealed but the company said more than 100,000 Internet users had used its
service. ISN offers some 20,000 computer-related products from nearly 1,000
companies. As an HSN subsidiary, ISN's on-line services will be greatly
expanded, company officials said.
'Through alliances with well-known retailers, branded manufacturers and
Internet service providers, HSN-ISN will be the pre-eminent electronic
merchant in on-line interactive retailing,' said Mr Jeff Gentry, president
of HSN Interactive, a newly-formed subsidiary responsible for developing new
interactive shopping services.
HSN sees the Internet service as a new electronic distribution outlet for
its own products as well as those from other merchants, retailers and
catalogue companies. 'We see on-line shopping as the forerunner of
inter-active television,' said Mr Peter Kern, HSN senior vice-president of
corporate finance and strategic planning. The acquisition would 'give us a
viable business in the near term and a leg up on interactive TV for the
longer term.
'There are many advantages for online users and operators - users can shop
whenever they desire from home or office, while providers avoid the expense
of producing and mailing catalogues and escape the overhead costs of store
facilities.'
The Internet Shopping Network is available at any time, from anywhere on the
Internet. Users with Macintosh, Windows or Unix-based computers, fitted with
a modem and communications software, can connect to ISN. To order goods from
ISN users must first provide the service with delivery and billing
information by telephone. This avoids sending sensitive data over the
Internet.
HSN already provides shopping services on Compuserve, a commercial on-line
service.
Lex, Page 24
