
China's chief Taiwan negotiator narrowly escaped being pelted with eggs by
independence activists chanting 'Chinese bandits go home' and burning
People's Republic of China flags on his arrival at Taipei's international
airport yesterday.
But Mr Tang Shubei, the most senior Chinese official to set foot on the
island which Beijing has regarded as a renegade province since 1949, also
missed a crowd of supporters who had come to welcome him when he was whisked
out of the airport through a secret exit.
As four days of talks begin today between Mr Tang and his Taiwanese
counterpart, Mr Chiao Jen-ho, Taiwanese remain divided and uncertain over
the pace and direction of the island's uneasy relations with its giant
neighbour.
Many people in Taiwan are suspicious of the motives of both governments, in
the talks, designed to resolve issues such as maritime rights and the
repatriation of hijackers, of which there have been many from the mainland
in the past year.
A government-commissioned poll, the results of which were released
yesterday, found 42.2 per cent of those surveyed supported neither
reunification with China nor Taiwanese independence. Nearly 21 per cent of
respondents backed reunification, while 11.6 per cent advocated
independence.
The passion of the protests against Mr Tang's arrival yesterday highlighted
the sensitivity of China policy for the Taiwanese, who have been taught to
regard the mainland as territory occupied temporarily by the Communist
government and to be retaken eventually by the Taiwanese nationalists.
Pro-independence protesters burnt the Chinese flag and urged Mr Tang to
return to the mainland. He suggested that 'talks are talks' and conceded
that 'we have to raise differing opinions', though Beijing has not ruled out
the possibility of using force to retake the island if it drifts too close
to independence.
As for the boisterous reception in Taipei, Mr Tang said: 'This is not the
way Chinese people should treat their guests. I hope to see some improvement
in this.'
Mr Eric Ni, a stockbroker at a Taiwanese securities firm, said he hoped that
Beijing and Taipei could adopt a more pragmatic approach in the cross-strait
talks, which began in April 1993. The previous five rounds have been mired
in legalistic issues.
'Both sides are basically just playing games,' Mr Ni said. 'But it's better
than not talking at all; otherwise there would be more tension.' He
supported resumption of direct shipping and air links as mutually
beneficial.
While in favour of improved relations, Mr Ni, a native Taiwanese in his late
20s, firmly rejects reunification.
'It is good to maintain an older brother-younger brother relationship with
China, but Taiwan should be independent,' he argues. 'There is no need for
reunification, even though we share the same blood. For example, the US
became independent from England over 200 years ago.
'Should Taiwan declare independence? 'Why not? There's no way China can
attack Taiwan. They can't because they would lose all their foreign
investment.'
Building manager Mr Wang, who came to Taiwan from China's Shandong Province
in 1949, fears closer ties with the mainland. 'Direct links are no good;
it's too dangerous for Taiwan. You can't trust the Communists.
'There's no way these talks can come to anything,' Mr Wang said 'Nobody
wants to see any progress. Reunification is not possible. Independence is
not possible either.'
Mr Chen Hsin-rong, an electrician said: 'It's good to hold talks, but
relations between the two sides should not develop too fast. Very, very
slowly is the best way. China refuses to recognise us on an equal basis, so
how can we even begin to agree on anything? Besides, Taiwan is a democracy
now. I visited China last year and there's no way that place can ever become
democratic.'
'Talks and friendly relations are good, but we must maintain at a distance,'
said Mr Chen Tung-chiang, a taxi driver.
