
The management of Counter Technology Inc., a Maryland security services and
technology company with 200 employees, had given little thought to exporting
even though its Mexican-American owners were interested in the North
American Free Trade Agreement.
'Nafta was just pie in the sky until we got approached by Commerce,' said Mr
Julian Martinez, a company spokesman. 'We felt we had barely penetrated the
domestic market, so we couldn't see going off to another country. Now I'm
glad we did.'
Under Export Mexico, one of the US government's numerous export promotion
schemes, Counter Technology was invited to be part of a delegation of US
minority-owned companies exhibiting in a trade show in Mexico. Company
representatives were thoroughly briefed about their prospects and given
appointments with likely customers in Mexico.
'The door was half way open for us. It opened our eyes to other
possibilities,' Mr Martinez said. The company is now studying two lucrative
opportunities - with the US embassy in Mexico and a Mexican airline.
Hundreds more small and medium size businesses - which once would never have
considered expanding beyond the US market - are being prodded to export by
the Commerce Department. Its Secretary, Mr Ron Brown, the former Democratic
party chief, seems personally to have taken over the Administration's
mantra: 'exports exports exports ..'
Commerce secretaries have long preached government-business partnerships and
the necessity of boosting small business exports. But Mr Brown and his
colleagues spent their first year in office preparing to make good on the
talk.
One of the Secretary's first acts was to convene a Trade Promotion
Coordinating Committee (TPCC), a group authorised by law during the Bush
Administration, which largely ignored the statute. Mr Brown, however, saw
the TPCC as his opportunity to play a prominent role in trade policy.
He appointed Mr Kenneth Brody, chairman of the US Export-Import Bank, to
chair a TPCC working group, and together in September they presented 60
specific recommendations for improving US export promotion programmes. Since
then, the two men have methodically set about instituting the proposals.
As a result, high technology companies, shackled for years by stringent
export controls, have been liberated. Export finance has been increased.
Export promotion programmes spread across 19 government agencies are being
strengthened and coordinated.
'Our government is stepping up in a way it hasn't before to help US
companies create and maintain jobs by being export winners,' says Mr Brody.
One TPCC priority is to make government aid easily available to novice
exporters, who might never otherwise find their way through the labyrinth of
government schemes.
This month and next Eximbank, Commerce, the Small Business Administration
and other agencies are rolling out the first four of a string of 'one stop
shops' to be located in major cities around the country. Eventually all
domestic field offices related to federal trade programmes will be
consolidated, located with other private and state export programmes and
their computer capacity upgraded. Information for programmes such as Export
Mexico will be disseminated along with other 'how to' data.
Export data are also available through the Commerce Department's new Trade
Information Centre, which has been receiving more than 1,000 calls a week
over its toll free telephone number. In response to requests, the centre's
'punch in' telefax has been churning out pages of information on the Uruguay
Round, Nafta and environmental technology trade (another new specialised
trade programme scheme).
US business finds even more on offer for the Export Mexico programme:
counselling from desk officers from the Office of Mexico in Washington;
export specialists from the US and Foreign Commercial Service to help
develop market strategies; and, for a price, customised market surveys, a
service providing credit and financial information about Mexican companies,
and government-organised trade missions.
In Mexico City, the Commerce Department has a US Trade Centre and library.
It has posts in Guadalajara and Monterrey. To help neophyte traders feel
more at home, the Commerce Department has set up a Gold Key Service which
for Dollars 350 for the first day arranges appointments with pre-qualified
potential Mexican agents, distributors and business associates; provides
interpreters and assistants and meeting spaces.
The US Small Business Administration has expanded its own programmes for
exporters. Minority owned companies can get loan guarantees. An Export
Revolving Line of Credit loan guarantee programme can be used to finance
labour and materials for manufacturing and wholesaling for export, to
finance foreign accounts receivable or to penetrate foreign markets.
For all the activity, there has not yet been a pay-off in export statistics,
Administration officials acknowledge. But unquestionably the US now is
gearing up for competition in a way it once prepared for wars and the space
programme. In the end, the investment will pay off handsomely.
