
The technologists, politicians, and policy thinktanks have all had their say
on the information superhighway. Most agree that it will not only be a place
to work, but also to play. Films, books and music are all expected to become
widely accessible 'on-line' as the rush towards the information highway
becomes a traffic jam.
But what of the artists whose work is supposed to become a featured
attraction on this journey? Aside from the announced corporatist objectives
of movie moguls such as George Lucas and Steven Spielberg, little has been
heard from the artistic (creative) community.
A fresh perspective comes from William Gibson, the Vancouver-based author
who coined the term 'cyberspace' in the mid-1980s in his best-selling
science fiction novel Neuromancer.
Gibson says the whole notion of an information highway is misconceived. He
is firmly of the opinion that all the hoopla is nothing more than an attempt
by industry to sell us things we don't want and by governments to be
involved where they really aren't needed. 'My feeling is that it all
originates from an ad agency somewhere - which is basically the US
government,' he says wryly. 'The notion of an information highway is a bogus
metaphor - what they are offering is a lot more like a (shopping) mall.'
Gibson also believes that business people and politicians have no concept of
why the Internet - the best example yet of a so-called 'information highway'
in action - is such a success, with an estimated 30m users worldwide.
'The Internet is strange. It doesn't make any money. It is transnational,
beyond anyone's control. It is the great anarchist event,' says Gibson. 'If
what these guys (in governments and industry) are calling the information
highway is an infrastructure upgrade (to fibre-optic cabling and high-speed
switching systems) that's great.' But if they want to create a system that
is controlled and generates business 'it won't work,' he warns.
He doubts that the information highway will be commercially viable until
whatever is behind the growth of the Internet is better understood. 'Is it
an historical anomaly, or is there some inherent value in the technology
used to create it?' he asks rhetorically.
Gibson says that the mystery of the Internet's success is likely to prevent
it from being completely 'hijacked' by commercial interests. 'The commercial
interests are looking at this as a medium like television,' he notes. 'But
it is actually much more like a language than a traditional medium of
communication.'
Gibson says it is the universality of the Internet that makes it similar to
a language - it is open to everyone and used by all manner of people. This
universality is evident when you start browsing around the discussion areas -which include everything from pornography to religious fundamentalism to
topics in the news.
The Internet also provides the means to break down government-imposed
barriers. During the darkest days of the 1991 failed coup attempt against
Mikhail Gorbachev in the old Soviet Union, for example, it was the Internet
that provided an international route out for many messages about what was
really happening.
Despite its usefulness as a mechanism for free speech, Gibson says it is
still hard to define what anybody means when they talk about an information
highway. He suggests that the technology underlying any 'information
highway' is currently akin to the many mechanical devices designed in the
Victorian era to achieve cinema-like effects before the first really
effective uses of film technology arrived.
He adds that this is partly because the potential of the various converged
technologies is not really apparent until the convergence takes place - and
suggests that if you look back to the turn of the century and read the
Victorians' visions of what life would be like in 2000, you get some idea of
how the public fascination with the possibilities of emerging technologies
often outstrips any kind of realistic analysis of what the future might
hold.
