
For the first time in decades, Indian hoteliers were pleasantly surprised to
see room occupancies soar in the summer in spite of inhospitable
temperatures, writes Shiraz Sidhva.
Hotels in the main metropolitan centres have traditionally suffered room
gluts between April and August. This year they were so full that they
withdrew the usual off-season discounts and had to turn away some of their
regular clients.
'It's now virtually impossible to get a hotel room at short notice,' says Mr
Prateek Chawla, director, Outbound Travels, Delhi-based travel agent and
tour operators. 'For the business traveller, there is no off-season.'
The Indian hospitality industry is reaping the benefits of the government's
liberalisation programme, which has made India one of Asia's most attractive
emerging markets. The top hotel chains - the Taj group, ITC Hotels and the
Oberoi group - will invest nearly Rs30bn in new projects over the next five
years, concentrating for the first time, on building budget hotels rather
than five-star ones.
The current total of 52,000 rooms in fewer than 900 government-approved
hotels across the country is woefully inadequate to cater to an estimated 5m
tourist arrivals by 1997 (double last year's figure of 2.2m). The government
has therefore cleared 524 hotel projects (till March this year), or 28,000
additional rooms.
Industry watchers doubt that all the proposed investment will materialise,
but the tourism ministry has set an ambitious target to build 125,000 rooms
by the year 2000. Several international hotel chains are tying up with
Indian partners, taking advantage of the fact that the government now allows
foreigners up to 51 per cent equity in the hotel industry.
The US chain, Holiday Inns Worldwide, has tied up with Inn Realty (owned by
a group of non-resident Indians) to open Holiday Inns in the Himalayan
mountain resorts of Nainital and Manali, and four-star hotels in nine Indian
towns. The chain will spend more than Rs500m on its plan to build 70 hotels
across India in the next four years.
The Australian Southern Pacific Hotels Corporation, which seeks to 'create a
base' for its two primary brands, Parkroyal and Travelodge, has signed an
agreement with Hospitality Resorts, an Indian company, to manage its Penta
Goa Hotel, being rechristened the Regency Travelodge Resort. The group has
invested about Dollars 2m in Indian projects so far, and is building three
new hotels, in New Delhi, Madras and Bangalore.
Other hotel chains entering the Indian hotel industry include the Hong Kong
based Four Seasons, which has signed an agreement with the Bombay-based
Leela Group, the US-based Marriott, which may tie up with the Indian Shaw
Wallace group, and Radisson of the US, which has tied up with
Singapore-based Scotts Holding and two Indian partners to build and manage
at least 12 projects, including three-star inns.
'India has never built for tomorrow, always yesterday,' says Mr Rabindra
Seth of ITC Hotels, who has been part of the industry for over 30 years. He
points out that there are more hotel rooms in cities like Singapore, Hong
Kong, Bangkok, London and Toronto than there are in the whole of India, for
all its size and wealth of tourist attractions.
In New Delhi, the capital, no new hotel has been built since 1982, when more
than a dozen hotels were hurriedly constructed for the Asian Games, creating
a glut for years. 'If we are to cater to 5.5m tourists and business
travellers by the turn of the century, then we need at least twice as many
rooms as we are offering now.'
The unavailability and cost of land, particularly in the big cities, has
deterred new investors. Socialist governments in the past regarded luxury
hotels as 'necessary evils', and levied prohibitive taxes on them, making
hotels less viable than they could have been.
While expenditure tax has been halved to 10 per cent, land continues to be a
major deterrent. The current boom has spawned a whole new breed of
first-time hoteliers, many of whom are land developers, builders and
contractors.
Entrepreneurs such as Shaw Wallace, the large liquor group, and Mahindra and
Mahindra, the Bombay-based heavy engineering, tractor and automobile
manufacturers, have diversified into hotels thanks to their ability to
withstand the long gestation periods associated with this business.
'One of the main stumbling blocks in the hotel industry is the acquisition
of land,' says Mr Seth. 'Builders are best equipped to tackle that part of
the problem, and will often allow professional hotel companies to run the
hotels for them.'
Foreign investors are also joining non-resident Indians (NRIs) allowed to
buy land.
Mr Dadi Balsara, a Singapore-based NRI businessman has recently announced a
joint venture with Howard Johnson Franchise systems of the US, to build 10
three-star hotels, with plans to build, acquire and franchise more than 70
hotels in the next five years.
India's leading luxury hotel chains are also developing medium-sized hotels,
to fill the yawning gap between luxury five-stars and cheap hotels that lack
the most basic amenities.
East India Hotels, which owns the Oberoi chain will start 11 new hotels in
the deluxe, first class and budget categories, investing Rs4.75bn over the
next four years. The group recently started its mid-market Novotel and
Trident chains, and is exploring an even more affordable class of budget
hotels.
ITC Hotels, a subsidiary of the tobacco and paper group plans to invest
Rs7bn in the next six years, out of which Rs2bn will be earmarked for the
middle segment. The company, which owns and manages the Maurya Sheraton
hotel in New Delhi, has entered into a joint venture with MS Shoes, who
recently acquired land through a Rs640m bid to build a Rs1.6bn, 400-room
super-deluxe hotel in the capital. ITC will expand its Bombay and Madras
properties, and is keen to acquire land for a hotel in Calcutta, where its
parent company is headquartered.
The Taj group, which owns and manages more than 40 hotels, including the
legendary Taj Mahal hotel in Bombay, has the most ambitious expansion
programme in the country.
Mr Pankaj Baliga, the group's vice-president, sales and marketing, says it
will invest over Rs15bn on 50 new hotels, including 10 wildlife lodges near
game sanctuaries, and golf and beach resorts. 'We are very
environment-conscious,' says Mr Baliga, insisting that the Taj hotels will
take extra care not to disturb the environment.
