
China's official media yesterday highlighted what was described as an
'important breakthrough' in talks between Chinese and Taiwanese officials,
but gave less weight to the story than newspapers in Taiwan.
People's Daily, the communist party newspaper, on page three of its
international edition, reported that common ground had been achieved on
'functional issues' such as the repatriation of hijackers, fishing disputes
and the return of mainland Chinese working illegally in Taiwan.
But observers in Taipei cautioned that while the outcome of the talks, the
sixth round since groundbreaking meetings in April 1993, had smoothed
cross-strait waters for the time being, underlying political tensions would
be likely to escalate in the future.
Reports in the Chinese press were consistent in tone with the need for
workmanlike discussions Beijing had emphasised in the lead-up to the talks
between Mr Tang Shubei, secretary-general of China's quasi-official
Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits and his Taiwanese
counterpart, Chiao Jen-ho of the Straits Exchange Foundation.
While Beijing is treating the latest developments in a sober manner, there
is no doubt it is taking seriously the process begun in Singapore in 1993
when the two sides agreed at a highly publicised meeting to explore ways to
broaden contacts as part of a confidence building process.
Impetus has been given to the discussions by Beijing's growing concern,
shared by the Taiwanese leadership, about a strengthening nationalist
movement in Taiwan. China's leaders will not have overlooked opinion polls
showing an increasing number of Taiwanese favouring independence.
China's avowed aim is to achieve reunification of Taiwan with the mainland,
but whereas in the past it had insisted there was plenty of time to achieve
this, gains made in recent elections by opposition parties committed to
independence have changed Beijing's approach.
Mr Tang gave voice to these concerns in comments after the two sides reached
agreement on Sunday. Describing cross-straits ties as 'very complicated', he
added: 'Whomever tries to cut these ties and create hostile feelings is
serving no-one's interests.'
While it would be stretching a point to describe Mr Tang's visit to Taiwan
as part of a 'charm offensive', there is also no doubt that he was at pains
to show a human face to the Taiwanese to counter the independence tide.
Mr Tang may also have wished to make amends for China's mishandling of a
boat tragedy in March in which 24 Taiwanese tourists were murdered while
sightseeing on a lake near Hangzhou, south of Shanghai.
Mr Hu Fo, a politics professor at National Taiwan University, said the talks
'certainly helped restore a certain spirit of harmony, consensus and mutual
trust' damaged by the incident. 'But the basic problems which existed well
before (the incident) remain. This will make it extremely difficult to reach
similar agreements on a political level.'
Mr Shih Ming-teh, chairman of the opposition Democratic Progressive Party,
denounced the talks, which he said Beijing had used merely to get ties back
on track.
Mainland Chinese media have expressed the hope that further high level
discussions can be held soon, including a repeat of the 'summit' in
Singapore between senior figures from both sides.
China would like to force the pace on such issues as direct shipping and air
links, but Taiwan remains nervous, fearing being drawn into a suffocating
embrace.
Beijing, for its part, wishes to encourage trade and investment further.
Taiwanese investment in the mainland exceeds USDollars 10bn (Pounds 6.5bn),
and would receive a significant boost if barriers to direct contacts were
removed.
