
An ambiguous 'confession' signed by a US army helicopter pilot captured by
North Korea almost two weeks ago could further complicate efforts to secure
his release.
Analysts were divided over whether the statement by Chief Warrant Officer
Bobby Hall would speed his release or provide Pyongyang with new grounds to
detain him in return for possible concessions from the US.
If his return is delayed further, it is likely to increase prospects that
the new Republican-controlled US Congress will try to block implementation
of the recent US nuclear accord with North Korea. Under the accord,
Pyongyang agreed to dismantle its nuclear programme in return for US
diplomatic ties and international economic aid.
Mr Hall admitted that his OH-58 reconnaissance helicopter made an 'intrusion
deep' into North Korean airspace, adding 'this criminal action is
inexcusable and unpardonable'.
'I only hope, and it is my desire, that the (North) Korean People's Army
will leniently forgive me for my illegal intrusion so that I may return to
my home and be with my family again,' he concluded.
The apology may provide a face-saving means for his release, while allowing
North Korea to exploit the incident for propaganda purposes and justify its
downing of the helicopter.
The statement, if it was dictated by North Korean officials as many believe,
does not offer much support for Pyongyang's allegation that the helicopter
was on a spying mission and that its intrusion was deliberate. Mr Hall's
statement said that his helicopter 'deviated' from its planned flight route
within South Korea, but gave no explanation for why the helicopter strayed
across the demilitarised zone. This could imply support for the US claim
that the helicopter lost its way after a navigational error.
But some South Korean government analysts believe that Mr Hall's statement
that the helicopter was on an 'observation reconnaissance' mission could be
interpreted as espionage if North Korea decided to press the affair.
Whether North Korea will try to use the issue to gain concessions from the
US is still unclear as it negotiates with a senior US diplomat who has
travelled to Pyongyang to gain the pilot's release.
North Korea may possibly exploit the incident to support its demand that the
US sign a formal treaty ending the 1950-53 Korean war and begin withdrawing
its 37,000 troops from South Korea.
