
South Korea yesterday decided to activate all emergency consultative
procedures with the US to guard against a possible military response by
North Korea as US and South Korean forces remained on a high state of
readiness.
The procedures include sharing of intelligence on North Korean troop
movements and co-ordination at a military and political level.
South Korean President Kim Young-sam is expected to brief senior officials
and political leaders tomorrow on the dispute over North Korean nuclear
inspections.
Meanwhile, the United Nations Command has asked for a meeting with North
Korean delegates to discuss the North's unilateral withdrawal from the
military armistice commission that supervises the 1953 truce that ended the
Korean War.
North Korea yesterday repeated its warning that UN economic sanctions
imposed on Pyongyang for its failure to accept full international nuclear
inspections would be considered an act of war.
But no unusual North Korean military movements have yet been detected in
spite of increased tensions on the Korean peninsula, according to South
Korean officials.
Mr Han Sung-joo, South Korean foreign minister, has arrived in New York to
consult with the US and Japan on the preparation of a sanctions resolution
that is likely to be introduced this week in the UN Security Council.
The three nations have reportedly already agreed on the timing and degree of
sanctions, which are expected to include Japan stopping at least Dollars
600m (Pounds 399m) in cash remittances sent to North Korea by pro-Pyongyang
Korean-Japanese.
The money is North Korea's largest source of hard currency, which is needed
to buy vital oil and food supplies to prop up its struggling economy.
'The sanctions the UN Security Council will apparently impose would be so
substantial as to cause pain to Pyongyang and would be enforced on a phased
basis,' said a senior South Korean official as quoted by the country's
national news agency.
The gradual introduction of sanctions would give North Korea time to back
away from a confrontation.
The dispute could be solved if the International Atomic Energy Agency is
allowed to examine two suspected nuclear waste sites that could determine
whether Pyongyang diverted plutonium from its reactor to a suspected nuclear
weapons programme in 1989.
The North is believed to have already destroyed other evidence of its
nuclear activity by removing spent fuel rods from its 5MW reactor without
international supervision.
