
British scientists have developed an experimental vaccine for bowel cancer,
the second most common cause of cancer deaths in industrialised countries.
It is being tested first as a potential treatment for patients with advanced
cancer but could be used eventually as a preventive vaccine for people known
to be genetically at risk from colo-rectal (bowel) cancer.
The Cancer Research Campaign, which funded the vaccine's development at
Nottingham University, said yesterday: 'The first clinical trials indicate
impressive results in patients.'
ImClone Systems, a New York biotechnology company, has signed an exclusive
worldwide licensing agreement with the CRC for commercial development of
Vaccine 105AD7, as it is known. ImClone is a leader in the fast-growing
research field of cancer vaccines; it is also testing vaccines for lung
cancer and melanoma.
Dr Lindy Durrant and Dr Adrian Robbins, who developed 105AD7 at Nottingham,
said it not only had the potential to prevent bowel cancer or stop the
disease progressing, but also had the advantage of producing no toxic
side-effects - unlike conventional treatments.
The encouraging first results came from tests on a dozen patients with
advanced bowel cancer; they will be published next week. The CRC is now
organising a larger clinical trial, based at Nottingham, with 350 patients,
and ImClone will carry out an extensive trial in the US.
Even if the new vaccine continues to perform well, it is unlikely to be
approved as a commercial treatment of bowel cancer before 1997. Its use in
preventive vaccination might then follow four years later.
There are several ways in which researchers are planning to use vaccines to
prevent cancer. One is the indirect approach - immunising people against
viruses, such as Epstein Barr, which are associated with certain cancers.
The CRC-ImClone approach, on the other hand, is aimed directly at tumour
cells. Vaccine 105AD7 is designed to mimic a particular part of the cell
surface.
This primes the patient's immune system to recognise and attack the cancer
cells themselves.
Every year more than 28,000 people in the UK are diagnosed as having bowel
cancer. Only 9,000 will be alive five years later. In the US, the disease
kills 55,000 people a year.
'Bowel cancer is the second most common cause of cancer death in the west,'
said Prof Gordon McVie, CRC scientific director.
