
Alec Gordon is commodities and energy editor of the Economist Intelligence
Unit
If 1994 was the year commodity markets woke up, then 1995 could be the Big
Breakfast - at least for speculators.
The attraction of markets in physical commodities, as distinct from markets
in bonds and other financial commodities, is that they move in cycles. Boom
follows bust and shortage glut in predictable, and therefore profitable,
succession. That's the theory, at least.
For most of the more important commodities in 1994, demand at last caught up
with supply. In some, such as natural rubber, the market had become so
depressed that productive capacity had been lost. The impact upon prices of
revived demand, when it came, was dramatic. In others, such as aluminium and
other base metals, the picture was obscured by exceptional flows of metal
from the former Soviet bloc.
The year 1995 will be one in which both supply and demand for most major
commodities will be rising. In most commodities, demand will be winning and
prices, although rising, will become more volatile.
This will be good news for speculators but bad for producers and consumers,
for whom volatility turns the serious business of commodity production and
consumption into something of a gamble.
Two factors will combine to destabilise markets. As prices revive, support
for price-stabilising commodity pacts on the part of producers will fade.
Of the old-style inter-governmental agreements, the International Natural
Rubber Agreement looks like being the only one to survive into 1995 with its
economic provisions intact. In short, the effects of government attempts to
dampen price movements will dwindle.
At the same time, attempts by the US General Accounting Office and other
government agencies to restrict and regulate the activities of so-called
hedge funds, which benefit from commodity price volatility, will fail.
This is because the funds are too protean, too big and too much part of
wider money-management operations to be readily controllable, however much
regulators across the world might want to try.
The funds operate through futures markets, which exist to provide insurance
against risk in commodity transactions arising from price volatility (as
well as a forum for speculation).
But do futures markets themselves cause volatility? An analysis of what
drives commodity prices suggests they do.
Conventionally, commodity prices are thought to be driven, at least in the
long run, by 'fundamentals' of supply and demand. There are other
fundamentals, such as lead times (longer for tree crops and mining, shorter
for annual crops) and substitution possibilities (high for fibres, vegoils
and natural rubber, low for beverage commodities).
This the market at its macro level, taking no account of the impact of
sentiment on prices and missing an important part of the picture. At the
micro level the dynamics are as different in commodity markets as they are
in physics.
Here, the long run ceases to exist and is replaced by the day to day. At
this level, commodity prices are not made by supply and demand. Instead,
they are made by traders responding to what they believe supply and demand
to be.
Even this is not quite right: from day to day, commodity prices are made by
traders responding to what they believe other traders believe supply and
demand will be at some point in the future.
So, sentiment or belief is what actually makes prices, not the abstractions
of supply and demand - real though these are. And, to a commodity trader,
volatility represents an opportunity as well as a risk.
Indeed, futures markets need volatility: with no price risk to insure
against, there can be no profitable insurance. The London futures market in
natural rubber died a few years ago for lack of business when prices were
stable.
Futures markets also need speculators, since it is they who provide the
liquidity essential to running the market (in a sense, they are the market).
Although speculators find it important to keep within the consensus, it is
equally important to trade as close as possible to the margin of that
consensus: to jump on - and off - bandwagons first. It is this need,
expressed collectively and backed by massive financial resources, which
swings prices.
The potential gap between market sentiment and fundamentals, between belief
(at the micro level) and 'reality' (at the macro level), varies inversely
with time.
Over the short term, where the gap is at its widest - and where a lot of
money is made and lost in futures markets - sentiment and market behaviour
are all-important. Here lies the opportunity for computers, and for rocket
scientists.
Computers are good at pattern recognition. They are already almost
unbeatable at chess and getting better all the time, and their use in
program trading has grown enormously. In fact, that growth prompts a
cybernetic prediction: as the patterns recognised become more incestuous,
program trading will itself become riskier.
Meanwhile, in the real world, the business of buying and selling actual
bales of cotton and bags of coffee will continue. This is the market
addressed by the Economist Intelligence Unit's world commodity forecasts
(WCF).
The WCF is aimed mainly at those involved directly in the production and use
of commodities, and at the medium and longer term. Because of this, it
misses much of the day-to-day change in sentiment; but it does aim to pick
up longer-term shifts in the balance of supply and demand.
Commodities in chronically short supply through much of 1995 are likely to
be coffee, most of the base metals, and natural rubber.
