
Growth in German money supply slowed further to an annualised rate of 11.3
per cent during June, after growth of 13.4 per cent in May and 15.4 per cent
in April, according to provisional Bundesbank figures released yesterday.
Economists who had forecast 12 per cent expansion in the M3 measure after
13.4 per cent in May and 15.4 per cent in April, said the
better-than-expected result revived expectations of further short-term
interest rate cuts this year.
However, economists and money dealers were divided about whether the
Bundesbank would ease policy as early as tomorrow. A report in the
influential Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung newspaper quoted Bundesbank
sources as saying the chances of a rate cut tomorrow were very slight but
surprises could not be ruled out.
'Everyone's waiting to see what the Bundesbank will do, especially after
these M3 figures,' a Frankfurt trader said.
M3 comprises currency in circulation, sight deposits, time deposits for less
than four years and savings deposits at three months' notice.
Nevertheless, most analysts agreed the key 4.5 per cent discount rate was
unlikely to be reduced before the central bank's four-week summer break
which starts after tomorrow's council meeting.
Attention at that meeting is to be focused on the traditional mid-year
review of M3s performance. Despite the welcome moderation in the bank's main
indicator of potential inflation, M3 is still growing far above the 4-6 per
cent target range set by the bank for this year.
Although the Bundesbank said special factors distorting the figure still had
to be taken into account, it added in a statement that lending to the
private sector - down in the previous two months - had fallen again.
Investment in long-term instruments outside the scope of M3 had also
strengthened further during the month.
One important factor boosting its growth since the start of this year has
been the reluctance of investors to transfer money into longer-term paper,
such as bonds, which do not figure in M3.
The Bundesbank said, however, that monetary growth had been 'strongly'
influenced by the cash management tactics of the public authorities during
the month. According to an analysis by Dresdner Bank, these tendencies
signalled a return to normal borrowing and investment patterns, and raised
the possibility that M3 would not show any noticeable growth for the rest of
this year.
Dresdner's optimism followed statements on Monday from Mr Otmar Issing, a
central bank director, that while it would be difficult to reach the 4-6 per
cent target zone by the year's end, it was not impossible.
Editorial comment, Page 15
