
Mitsubishi, the most tightly interwoven of Japan's keiretsu corporate
families, is a classic example of how formerly cosy group ties are being
subjected to market forces.
It is an empire of 216,000 employees, prominent in businesses ranging from
banking to beer, shipping and shipbuilding, property, oil, aerospace and
textiles. On average, the 29 companies at the heart of the group hold 38 per
cent of each other's shares, above the average for keiretsu corporate
families.
Mitsubishi companies exchange more directors than do other keiretsu and have
a long record of rallying member companies from different parts of the group
to co-operate on projects, one of the main competitive advantages of the
keiretsu system.
Tokyo's business district, Marunouchi, is dominated by the headquarters of
15 Mitsubishi group companies, known as Mitsubishi Village, a visual symbol
of their central role in Japan's industrial establishment.
Intra-group co-operation can be taken less for granted since the on-set of
recession in 1991 prompted management across the group to place
profitability, rather than gaining market share, as the prime objective,
says Mr Masayoshi Hayashikawa, general manager of planning at Mitsubishi
Corporation, the trading company near the heart of the group.
This new approach is best illustrated by the recent decision of Nippon
Yusen, a shipper in the group, to buy South Korean ships for the first time,
rather than from its usual supplier, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries. The yen's
rise has made Japanese shipbuilding costs 30 per cent higher than South
Korea's. 'A mutually beneficial relationship in steel and ships? That is a
thing of the past,' says Mr Tsuda Yoshida, managing director of Mitsubishi
Heavy Industries.
Similarly, MHI recently decided to use Nissho Iwai, a member of the Sanwa
keiretsu, to sell its ownheavy machinery in Indonesia.
Mitsubishi group members also have no qualms about declining requests from
Mitsubishi Estate to take space in one of the world's most expensive
buildings, the under-occupied Y270bn, 80-floor, Landmark Tower in Yokohama.
However, family members still close ranks when business interests or
opportunities are at stake.
Landmark Tower, for example, is a classic example of the kind of mistimed
property development that has brought many developers to their knees. The
project was started by Mitsubishi Estate just before the spectacular
collapse in inflated asset prices four years ago and completed in July last
year, in the depth of the recession.
An independent company might have been forced to dump the project. Yet
Mitsubishi Estate was able to carry on, confident that Mitsubishi Bank would
continue funding the project through good times and bad. Landmark Tower may
be a white elephant today, but even the most critical property analysts
believe that any company that can afford to continue owning the tower will
end up, in a few years, with one of the finest assets in the domestic
property market.
But perhaps the most enduring quality of the keiretsu system, says Mr
Hayashikawa, is its ability to pass information fast around the corporate
family.
In Mitsubishi's case, the vehicle for this is the so-called 'Friday Club' at
which the bosses of the top 29 member companies meet for a chat over lunch
on the second Friday of each month, on the top floor of the Mitsubishi
Building in Marunouchi.
It is at this gathering that intelligence can be shared, paving the way for
group companies to work together. An example of how this team-work can still
pay dividends is the co-operation between Mitsubishi's trading, oil
exploration and oil refining arms in making, off the coast of Vietnam last
June, the largest oil discovery by a Japanese company for 35 years.
