
Foreign financial institutions are to be allowed to conduct yuan-denominated
business on an 'experimental basis' in China.
Mr PK Mathur, Chase Manhattan's senior China representative, described the
move, which was welcomed by Western bankers, as a 'serious step in the right
direction'.
Previously, foreign bank branches had effectively been shut out of the local
currency market.
Friday's announcement, in a communique issued after a meeting in Beijing of
the Sino-US Joint Economic Committee (JEC), is certain to hasten the
scramble by foreign banks to gain a foothold in China.
Mr Liu Zhongli, China's finance minister, told Mr Lloyd Bentsen, the
visiting US treasury secretary, that Beijing would allow foreign banks to
deal in yuan and would also open additional 'major cities' to foreign
financial institutions.
Foreign bankers expect the Chinese to move cautiously because of concerns
that China's debt-ridden and under-capitalised state-run banks would be
hard-pressed to compete with foreign institutions.
Foreign branches are likely to be restricted to accepting yuan-denominated
deposits from existing customers. Lending in local currency to joint
ventures would be permitted on a limited basis.
About 60 foreign branches and six joint-venture banks and finance houses
have been established in China since a gradual reform of the banking system
began in the early 1980s.
The foreign bank presence has been largely restricted to coastal cities and
special economic zones, including Shanghai, Guangzhou, Tianjin and Dalian,
but it seems likely that branches will be permitted in major inland centres
such as Wuhan and Shenyang. Beijing itself has been off-limits to foreign
branches.
Chinese officials are also saying that restrictions on foreign insurance
companies will be eased. At present, only one foreign company, American
International Group, has been permitted to establish a presence in China.
Mr Chen Yuan, a deputy governor of the People's Bank, China's central bank,
told the Sino-US joint economic committee that an additional 'one or two'
foreign insurance companies would be allowed to enter the domestic market.
However, Mr Chen warned that it would 'take time' for China to work out a
plan to allow foreign financial organisations to conduct yuan business. He
said that the time was not yet ripe to open the securities market to foreign
companies since further work was needed on securities regulations.
The Chinese official said the State Council, China's cabinet, had recently
approved regulations governing the management of foreign financial
institutions, and these were expected soon to be made public after further
revision.
