
The Vienna-based Inter-national Atomic Energy Agency yesterday urged North
Korea to issue entry visas to its inspectors as soon as possible. An IAEA
spokesman said the agency was 'dismayed' at the unexpected delay to a
programme of inspections agreed a week ago between the agency and Pyongyang.
'The content of the mission is not in dispute any longer. The scope and
objectives (of the inspections) have all been agreed. What is at issue is a
date and visas,' Mr David Kyd, an IAEA spokesman, said.
A team of IAEA inspectors was expected to begin inspections at seven North
Korean sites on Tuesday, but they have not been given visas.
North Korea has said issuing of visas would depend on the outcome of
bilateral discussions with the US, Mr Kyd added.
But the agency would not be formally referring the issue to the UN Security
Council. The council can impose sanctions against North Korea if it
continues to resist compliance with the 1969 nuclear non-proliferation
treaty.
The IAEA's board would send its latest status report on North Korea to the
UN.
North Korea announced last year it was withdrawing from the
non-proliferation treaty, but later relented. In recent weeks, it has again
threatened to pull out of the international safeguards system entirely.
US and North Korean officials are expected to meet today in New York to
discuss new demands by Pyongyang concerning international inspections.
In a meeting with the US yesterday, North Korea demanded Washington make a
written pledge on concessions, in return for Pyongyang allowing the IAEA
inspection team into the country, according to South Korean news agency
Yonhap.
The US promises would include suspending this year's US 'Team Spirit'
military exercise in South Korea and reopening high-level talks between
Washington and Pyongyang on possible US diplomatic recognition and economic
aid.
The US has already verbally agreed to carry out these measures if North
Korea lets in the IAEA inspectors and resumes talks with South Korea on
de-nuclearisation.
But disagreements still exist on the timing of the US steps and whether
Washington is willing to make these commitments in writing.
