
German money supply rose at an unexpectedly high rate in December as large
inflows of cash from outside the country were accompanied by a surge in
domestic lending, the Bundesbank said yesterday.
The announcement jolted the bond market and reduced hopes that the German
central bank would soon move to reduce the discount and Lombard rates. They
have stood at 5.75 and 6.75 per cent since last October.
Financial markets were prepared for a high figure but the 8.1 per cent
increase in M3 was much greater than expected. M3 measures broad money on
which the Bundesbank relies for its estimates of inflationary developments.
The figure was considerably higher than the 7.2 per cent growth in November
and well above the 4.5-6.5 per cent growth target for last year.
Yesterday's figures mean M3 growth, on an annualised, seasonally adjusted
basis, has exceeded the target range for three successive years.
There was further disappointment that the Bundesbank did not cut interest
rates after yesterday's meeting of its policymaking council and there was a
strong sell-off in the bond market. Yields on five-year government bonds
climbed by 6 basis points to 5.17 per cent.
Mr Peter Lang, economist at Bayerische Vereinsbank in Munich, said the M3
growth would 'reinforce the Bundesbank's caution in bringing down interest
rates', but another economist, playing down the figures, said: 'What the
Bundesbank really looks at is inflation and that is coming down sharply.'
The Bundesbank said the exceptional factors which had led to the sharp rise
in December had already been partly reversed in January. It blamed what it
called the extraordinarily high increase in M3 on two chief factors - a
surge in domestic bank lending and the influx of DM59.2bn (Dollars 34.2bn)
into the banking system in December.
The capital influx exceeded that of September 1992, when DM42.7bn flowed
into Germany amid currency market turmoil. The Bundesbank said this movement
was attributable to tax changes which made it attractive for individuals to
repatriate investments from Luxembourg, coupled with the impact of the
repatriation of corporate deposits from the Euromarket. Domestic lending
rose 10.3 per cent, due mainly to a surge in mortgage borrowing.
Economists said the Bundesbank's decision not to cut rates was also
conditioned by a bout of sabre-rattling in the dispute over pay for
metalworkers.
See Lex; Bonds, Page 27; Currencies, Page 29; World Stocks, Page 35
